US states' moves to ease coronavirus lockdowns risk dangerous patchwork
The US states of Georgia, Oklahoma and Alaska have begun loosening lockdown orders on their pandemic-wounded businesses, even as the confirmed US death toll from Covid-19 has passed 50,000 and despite warnings from health experts that such steps may be coming too early.
Other states, such as Florida and Michigan, are also showing some tentative signs of starting to ease restrictions. In Colorado Governor Jared Polis has announced that a previously issued "stay-at-home" mandate is being updated to a "safer-at-home" mandate, with select businesses also now reopening. In Texas some businesses, including restaurants, have opened in defiance of state guidance.
The tentative first moves feed into a national debate over how much and how quickly the US should reopen as the virus wreaks both economic carnage that has cratered the once-booming economy but also continues to kill hundreds of Americans every day.
It is a debate that has sometimes pitted the White House against some governors, often of Democratic-run states reluctant to ease restrictions while the pandemic still rages. It has also raised the prospect of a patchwork reopening across the US, which many health experts worry will hamper the national effort to contain and then minimize the virus.
Republican governors in Georgia and Oklahoma allowed salons, spas and barbershops to reopen, while Alaska opened the way for restaurants to resume dine-in service and retail shops and other businesses to open their doors, all with limitations. Some Alaska municipalities chose to maintain stricter rules.
Even in some other states and jurisdictions that are moving more slowly there have been tentative signs of reopening. In Orange county in southern California beaches have reopened, though beach car parks remain closed and non-residents have been urged to stay away.
Though limited in scope, and subject to social-distancing restrictions, the reopenings marked a symbolic milestone in the debate in the United States and beyond as to how quickly political leaders should lift economically devastating lockdown orders.
During a White House press briefing on Friday, Donald Trump spoke optimistically of the economy but also asked people to continue social distancing and using face coverings. The same day, Trump signed a $484bn bill to aid employers and hospitals under stress from the pandemic. Over the past five weeks, roughly 26 million people have filed for jobless aid, or about one in six US workers.
Trump also claimed his widely criticized comments suggesting people can ingest or inject disinfectant to fight Covid-19 was an attempt at sarcasm.
The coronavirus has killed more than 190,000 people worldwide, including – as of Friday – more than 50,000 in the United States, according to a tally compiled by John Hopkins University from government figures. The actual death toll is believed to be far higher.
Amy Pembrook and her husband, Mike, reopened their hair salon in the Oklahoma town of Fairview after it had been shuttered for about a month.
"We're super excited about going back, but we have caught a little flak from people who say it's too early," Amy Pembrook said. "We just said we can live in fear for a long time or we can trust that everything is going to be OK."
Without a tried-and-tested action plan for how to pull countries out of coronavirus lockdown, the world is seeing a patchwork of approaches. Schools reopen in one country, stay closed in others; face masks are mandatory in some places, a recommendation elsewhere.
Meanwhile, testing continues to lag across the United States. To date, according to data compiled by the Covid Tracking Project, just under 4.7 million people have been tested in the country of 330 million. Researchers at Harvard University have estimated a minimum of 500,000 daily tests are needed, and possibly much more, in order to safely reopen the economy.
In Florida, the Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, said his administration plans to let pharmacists administer tests to reach a broader range of people, including those with no symptoms who believe they may have been exposed.
In Michigan, the Democratic governor, Gretchen Whitmer, lengthened her stay-at-home order through 15 May, while lifting restrictions so some businesses can reopen and the public can participate in outdoor activities such as golf and boating. Michigan has nearly 3,000 deaths related to Covid-19, behind only New York and New Jersey.
New York reported its lowest number of daily Covid-19 deaths in weeks on Friday. The state recorded 422 deaths as of the day before – the fewest since 31 March, when it recorded 391 deaths. More than 17,000 people have died in the state from the outbreak.