'She was told to keep working': is the US government failing health workers?
The top worker-safety agency is investigating Covid-19 deaths – but critics are doubtful the inquiries will amount to anything
In late March, Rose Harrison, a 60-year-old nurse, worked a nightshift at the Marion regional nursing home in Hamilton, Alabama.
Even though the US was in the grip of the pandemic, and there were positive Covid-19 cases in her county, no one at the facility was wearing masks, according to her daughter, Amanda Williams.
A few days later, a patient Harrison cared for on her shift tested positive and died. When Harrison began showing symptoms herself, including coughing, fatigue and a low fever, a supervisor told her, according to Harrison's daughter, to keep coming to work unless her temperature crossed 100.4F.
"She really felt like she would be retaliated against if she didn't go to work," said Williams, who urged her mother to stay home. "She kept telling me, 'Amanda, I have to work. I have to get my house paid off.'"
At one point, Harrison was coughing so hard in a work meeting she was asked to leave – but she was not immediately given a Covid-19 test, and reported to work for several more days, according to Williams.
When her symptoms worsened, on 3 April, Williams drove her mother to the hospital. On the drive, Harrison said she regretted working all week while sick. She died in the hospital two days later, leaving behind her husband, three daughters and 10 grandchildren.
"I think if proper steps were taken from the beginning, this would have been different," said Williams. "When your mother dies mad, you're pretty much mad."
North Mississippi Health Services, which owns the nursing home, and the home's administrator did not reply to calls or emails about Harrison.
Cases such as Harrison's are raising new questions about whether the federal government will hold workplaces accountable for employee deaths.
The top US worker-safety agency is investigating Harrison's death, and that of 44 other healthcare workers from New York to California. Yet former agency officials are raising doubts about whether the investigations will deliver justice, noting that the lawyer Donald Trump appointed to lead the US labor department, Eugene Scalia, spent years in private practice helping corporations fight health and safety regulations meant to protect workers.
Now, Scalia, the son of the late conservative supreme court justice Antonin Scalia, oversees the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or Osha, the federal agency tasked with protecting worker safety.
"It's a worker-safety crisis of monstrous proportions, and Osha is nowhere to be found," said David Michaels, an epidemiologist and George Washington University professor, who was assistant labor secretary and ran Osha from 2009 to 2017.
Employers are required to report a work-related death to Osha or face fines for failing to do so. Yet former Osha leaders say the agency has not openly reminded hospitals and nursing homes to file such reports in recent weeks.
Former labor department officials also point to recent memos from Osha suggesting officials are unlikely to penalize all but the most careless employers. The memo encourages inspectors to consider employers' "good faith" efforts to comply with regulations, said a citation may be issued "where the employer cannot demonstrate any efforts to comply".
Michaels said the word "any" in the memo is significant, and could amount to making even one phone call to try to buy masks for workers.
Federal Osha officials did not respond to a request for comment.
Since the first cases appeared in the US, healthcare workers have aired complaints on social media and to lawmakers about a lack of personal protective equipment, pressure to work while sick, and retaliation for voicing safety concerns as they have cared for many of the more than 800,000 patients stricken by the coronavirus.
The picture is complicated by an international supply chain crisis. Even employers making efforts to protect workers have had trouble acquiring key supplies like masks and testing kits. Trying to better protect workers and bypass supply logjams, hospitals, governors and the US military have taken to the skies to fly key testing supplies and protective gear from Italy and China.
Amid shortages of N95 masks, Osha and the CDC have downgraded their requirements for worker safety, suggesting alternatives to the highly protective masks may be permissible. Workers are left with the choice in some places to wear a bandanna in situations that had called for a properly fitted N95 mask, which can filter out smaller particles.
"Osha has really completely abandoned their mandate to protect workers," said Debbie Berkowitz, a former Osha chief of staff and director of the National Employment Law Project's worker safety and health program. "And every worker is on their own," she added.
Last week, the CDC reported that more than 9,200 health workers had been infected with the coronavirus, a number the agency concedes is a vast undercount. The agency said the true number is probably closer to 11% of all known cases.
A 13 April Osha memo said the agency would prioritize death investigations involving healthcare workers and first responders. The fatality investigation into Harrison's death started on 7 April and focuses on the nursing home where she worked. Such investigations can be triggered by an employee complaint, or an agency employee who reads a press report.
Federal records show the 44 other Osha fatality investigations into healthcare workers' deaths – searchable here – involve hospitals, an emergency medical service agency, a jail health department and nursing homes.
A recent survey of over 1,000 frontline nurses conducted by a major union shows that more than 80% say they still don't have enough protective gear – and nurses report wearing garbage bags to protect themselves.