Billionaire Kerry Stokes exempted from mandatory hotel quarantine after returning from Colorado ski fields
After returning to WA from near Aspen on private jet, media mogul and his wife were given medical exemption to spend 14 days in their Perth mansion
The media mogul Kerry Stokes and his wife were allowed to avoid mandatory hotel quarantine on medical grounds when they arrived in Western Australia by private jet two weeks ago, and instead spent 14 days holed up in their Perth mansion.
The exemption was granted despite the couple having been in the Colorado ski fields at the time of a coronavirus outbreak in luxury ski resort villages in mid-March.
The owner of Seven West Media and his wife, Christine, landed at Perth airport in their Bombardier BD-700 Global Express on 8 April, WAtoday reported.
That was 11 days after the Australian government ordered that everyone arriving from overseas would be held in a hotel or other accommodation for a period of supervised quarantine.
On the same day the Stokeses landed, authorities in WA launched an inquiry into how a 71-year-old man in mandatory hotel quarantine with his wife ended up in intensive care in a coma after waiting nine hours for a response to his wife's request for medical assistance.
Stokes is one of the richest and most powerful men in Australia, with interests in mining, construction and media, and an estimated net worth of US$2.4bn. He is arguably the most influential person in Western Australia.
Asked on Thursday if he thought anyone should be exempt from the quarantine laws, Scott Morrison said it was the "expectation of all Australians" that "we're all in this together. All of us".
WA introduced its own hard border restrictions on 5 April, with limited exemptions for essential workers and on compassionate and medical grounds.
A spokesman for Stokes told Guardian Australia the media mogul was granted an exemption on medical grounds.
"Mr Stokes and his wife received an exemption because Mr Stokes recently underwent a medical procedure," the spokesman said. "The exemption also applied to Mr Stokes' wife who accompanied him and they have been in isolation for two weeks at their home in Perth.
"Mr and Mrs Stokes strictly followed all the required protocols during that time, as did the air crew.
"Many thousands of Australians have also received exemptions over the last month."
Since the WA hard border came into effect on 6 April, a spokeswoman for WA Police said, 3,000 people had arrived in the state by air and 900 had been granted an exemption to hotel quarantine.
Those 900 were "given directions to self-quarantine (for example, at a residential address) as opposed to a quarantine centre (for example, a hotel). More than 600 were required to attend a quarantine centre," police said.
"Exemptions to enter WA without attending a quarantine centre are granted for a variety of reasons including compassionate and health related grounds."
Police would not comment on Stokes's particular case.
The decision on whether to grant an exemption rests with police. Guardian Australia understands that in the case of medical matters police call the health department for advice. The department called Stokes's doctor and passed the relevant information back to police.
The couple had recently been locked down in their $15m penthouse in Beaver Creek near Aspen, Colorado, Nine newspapers reported. Their private jet flew from the US to Perth via Hawaii.
The WA health minister, Roger Cook, said the decision to grant an exemption was made by police and health authorities, and he would not comment on an individual case.
However he said there were "a range of exemptions in place" on the requirement for supervised quarantine, and that "since the hard borders have been put in place many hundreds and probably thousands of exemptions have been processed by the police and the health department in relation to people coming back into the state".