'What is happening is not normal. We 100% need answers. This is not adding up'
Zia Wassan says there is a feeling of vulnerability in BAME communities like his and more needs to be done prevent deaths
For Zia Wassan there is the devastating grief of losing his father - his protector and anchor in life. But underneath that grief, that sense of undeniable loss, there is something else – a feeling that things could have turned out differently.
"My dad went before his time, he shouldn't have died," says the 35-year-old. Zia's father, Choudhary Aslam Wassan, 67, a popular and charismatic former food business pioneer and political campaigner from Birmingham, died from coronavirus last month. His son says the disease has also claimed the lives of at least 10 of his father's friends – middle-aged Asian men with underlying health conditions – in recent weeks.
These men are among thousands of people of BAME backgrounds who find themselves at the forefront of a disturbing statistic. They are over-represented in the Covid-19 death toll by 27%. This means that for every four fatalities you would expect to see among BAME people an additional Covid-19 related fatality has occurred. Of patients who died in hospital up to 19 April, 19% were BAME, while these groups make up only 15% of the general population in England.
For Zia, this statistic and the untimely deaths of his father and his friends are not only shocking but require in-depth investigation. He says there is a distinct feeling of vulnerability in communities like his – inner-city, historically impoverished areas with high levels of health issues, and more needs to be done within these communities to stop the transmission and subsequent deaths from the disease.
"What is happening is not normal. We 100% need answers. This is not adding up - why are so many Asian men dying. It is not normal. There is something behind this and it's my strong view that it needs to be investigated," he says.
"It just doesn't make sense. We need to know why they are not coming back from hospital. My dad definitely went before his time and I'd say a good 10 of his friends have all died in a similar way. They had underlying health problems, got a fever, ended up in hospital and then didn't come back."
Wassan, a great-grandfather, first started displaying symptoms of the disease on 20 March. Before lockdown he had been travelling around the country, including attending a funeral.
"He first just got a cough and was told to self-isolate. He was in good health but was a type-2 diabetic so we were hoping he would be given antibiotics, but the GP decided not to," said Zia. He said that although antibiotics are not considered effective treatment for Covid-19, other family members displaying symptoms who had received them had survived.
"He carried on following the rules but then his cough started to get worse and he had a fever. He was worse and then we called an ambulance. Within two hours of getting to hospital they had taken him away to intensive care. Nobody could see him or be with him.
"Then later, he phoned me and said he was being told that he wasn't getting better and they would need to put him to sleep and on to a ventilator – that's the last time I spoke with him. He told me to look after my mum and the family: 'Take care of yourself, and I will see you in three days,' but that was the end."
Wassan would never return to his home in the Handsworth area of Birmingham. His ventilator was switched off after he showed no signs of recovering. He died in the City hospital on 29 March.
Zia's mother, Tanvir, was herself briefly hospitalised with symptoms of the virus, while other members of the family have also been ill. They are all now recovering at home with Zia currently in self-isolation.
Zia said: "When he first started showing symptoms he asked his GP for antibiotics but he wasn't given any. I don't understand this because he was in a high-risk category. This must be happening to lots of other Asian families too. They need to be treated with more care if it is emerging that they are at higher risk, surely."
The Birmingham MP Khalid Mahmood, who had known Wassan for around 30 years, backed calls for an investigation into the disproportionate number of deaths in BAME communities. Mahmood, who has previously said older Muslim and Sikh people in the area were struggling to adhere to government guidelines surrounding physical distancing, said some communities would bear the brunt of the disease.
"What we are seeing play out here is the result of years of austerity cuts within NHS services in these poor, deprived areas like Handsworth and Lozells. Where historically these communities have not been supported and which has now made them devastatingly vulnerable to this disease. It is an absolute disaster, we need to protect these people," he added.
Wassan, came to Birmingham from Pakistan in the 1970s, aged 21, with his brother Ashraf Wassan, and devoted his life to the city. He championed Labour activists in the city, including Mahmood, now MP for Perry Barr, and Waseem Zaffar, now cabinet member for transport and the environment for Birmingham city council.
He is survived by his wife and six children Zia, Waheed, Saeed, Rukiya, Sadia and Shazia. A seventh child, Naveed, died in 2009. Nephews Jawaad, Zahid and Shahid Ashraf are among a large extended family. He was a grandfather of 23 children and has one great grandchild.
This article was amended on 24 April 2020 to include additional context from Zia Wassan.