Why families of dying prisoners are unable to say last goodbyes
As people in state and federal custody die from the coronavirus families are forced to delay funerals or are unable to attend burials
María Felícitas Infante Zamora and her siblings were told by Texas prison officials last week that their father, Bartolo Infante, had died. Infante, 72, had been in prison since 2000 for a sexual assault.
But the family only learned that he had tested positive for Covid-19 from a news article they came across on Facebook days later.
Then came another blow. Infante's relatives could not afford to hold their own funeral, so the Texas department of criminal justice (TDCJ) said it would bury him at a prison cemetery. But the family would not be able to attend the burial on Thursday because gatherings put people at increased risk of contracting or spreading the virus.
"They said: 'We're just going to give you a picture of him and that's it,'" Zamora said. The picture would be of her father's body at his funeral.
Infante was incarcerated in the Barry B Telford Unit, near the Arkansas border, but will be buried at a prison cemetery in Huntsville, roughly 150 miles from Lockhart, where Zamora and her mother live.
They are not alone. Families across the US, and around the world, have been unable to be with their loved ones when they die, unable to attend funerals and unable to grieve with family and friends.
A TDCJ spokesman, Jeremy Desel, said he had no specific information about why the family was told they could not attend the funeral, but pointed out that outside of prisons, many funerals have been postponed as state and local governments ban public gatherings to try to curb the spread of the coronavirus.
At least 63 people in state and federal custody have died from the coronavirus, according to data collected by the Marshall Project, which reached eight families who lost someone in prison. Some are still wrangling with prison officials to obtain the bodies of their loved ones and to learn basic information about their final days.
Given the massive number of elderly prisoners around the country, deaths are hardly rare in federal and state prisons, as well as jails. And even under normal circumstances, the death of an incarcerated family member is often shrouded in secrecy. For those who have no known next of kin or no family willing to handle arrangements, every state and county has its own protocol for handling remains. In New York City, the unclaimed are buried in mass graves on Hart Island in the Bronx.
When a prisoner is hospitalized, state and federal prison officials sometimes inform their relatives. But several families said officials would not provide hospital information, so they could not directly ask about the course of treatment or prognosis. Officials have also been criticized for exacerbating the trauma of families by leaving voicemails informing them of their relatives' death.
A lack of information has frustrated Kathy Wilson, the wife of James Wilson, who died on 29 March at the federal prison in Oakdale, Louisiana, after testing positive for Covid-19 and suffering respiratory failure. Wilson said her husband "seemed fine" when they spoke a few days before his death. She is furious that she was never informed that he was severely ill. "Somebody there could have taken five minutes to call and tell me," she said.
When someone dies in prison, even without a pandemic, some families struggle for years to gain insight into their final days. Coronavirus has erected more barriers in their search for answers. Testing is limited in many facilities, and many family members say officials have not done enough to prevent the virus from spreading behind bars.
Eddie James may never find out if coronavirus killed his son. Ricky James died at Mid-State correctional facility in Fort Dix, New Jersey, on 3 April. James says the week before his son died, he had called his girlfriend several times to say he was sick and worried that his incessant coughing and chills were symptoms of coronavirus.
But according to James, the prison refused to test his son even after he died. He says officials told the family that the medical examiner determined that his son died from heart disease. But James is skeptical. His son was 36 when he died.
James looked into having an independent autopsy to determine the cause of death, but it proved too expensive: it would have cost $5,600 on top of the $12,000 he spent to bury his son.
Nineteen guards and five prisoners at the New Jersey facility where James died have tested positive for coronavirus as of 15 April, according to an online dashboard posted by the New Jersey department of corrections.
The first guards tested positive on 1 April, according to a spokesperson for the department. The spokesperson would not confirm whether James was tested for coronavirus, saying that "an incarcerated person's medical record is confidential, even in death".
James is making the funeral arrangements from his home in California. But he won't be able to attend the service. Flying into New Jersey, where more than 2,800 people have died from coronavirus, is too risky. But he hopes the funeral home will stream the service so he can watch online.
Olivia Garcia first heard that her father was sick from a family member of someone incarcerated with her father, Margarito Garcia-Fragoso, at FCI Elkton in Ohio. Garcia-Fragoso died on 2 April.
Being separated from her family while mourning her father is "the hardest part" of the whole ordeal, Garcia said.
"His family is not going to have the closure that we all need," she said. "We can't even have a gathering here and support and hug one another because we have to be careful ourselves."
This story was published in partnership with The Marshall Project, a not-for-profit news organization covering the US criminal justice system. Sign up for their newsletter, or follow The Marshall Project on Facebook or Twitter.