Will Trump's coronavirus travel ban work? Scientists express skepticism
Public health experts say that once a disease has begun circulating within a community, banning outsiders is mostly futile
Donald Trump's dramatic announcement this week that the US would restrict most travel from Europe caused chaos and confusion at airports, shocked the stock market and took lawmakers on both sides of the Atlantic by surprise.
What it didn't do, according to experts, was help abate the spread of coronavirus in the US.
Although epidemiologists are still learning which strategies work best to contain the spread of coronavirus, preliminary research on Covid-19, as well as studies on the spread of other infectious diseases, suggest that travel restrictions, if implemented early, can slightly slow outbreaks.
However, public health experts say that once a disease has begun circulating within a community, banning outsiders is mostly futile.
"Unfortunately, travel bans sound good," said Bill Hanage, an epidemiologist at Harvard's TH Chan School of Public Health. "But we're way past the point where simply restricting travel is a reasonable response."
Moreover, the US restrictions – which initially applied to EU nations and which have now been extended to the UK and Ireland – ban most foreign nationals from entering the US but do not bar American citizens, permanent residents or many of their family members.
That – is a "profoundly strange" policy in the face of a global pandemic, Hanage said.
"An Italian who's living in Italy, and a French person who's living in Italy – and an American – could all be just as likely to carry the virus," noted Danielle Ompad, an epidemiologist at New York University. "The ban that Trump announced, it's focused a little more on nationality and not exposure."
Strict travel restrictions could theoretically delay the spread of disease, if not reduce the number of people who become infected, allowing hospitals and other healthcare facilities to better tend to patients, Ompad said. But evidence suggests that the restrictions only work if used strategically, in conjunction with other containment measures.
But "our response to this pandemic has been late, and our response has been inconsistent," Ompad said. Notably, the US isn't able to test most people who enter the country, let alone those living within its borders due to ongoing shortages of test kits. Although the administration announced plans to screen many passengers arriving at American airports, some infected patients show no signs of illness, so checking symptoms won't stop citizens or visitors from passing on the infection.
"So I'm not sure a travel ban is the best use of resources right now," Ompad said. "Regardless of travel restrictions, the number of cases is going to increase, probably dramatically, in the next week or two."
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) had reported more than 1,500 cases in the US as of Friday evening. But Congress' in-house physician reportedly told staffers to eventually expect 70m to 150m.
Both Italy and China have adopted stringent travel restrictions, but to little avail, multiple epidemiologists pointed out. Italy was the first European country to ban flights from China, but it remains amongst the worst affected.
In China, where officials shut down travel both in and out of Wuhan, the city where the Covid-19 outbreak began, the travel ban barely slowed the spread of diseases, according to a report published in Science.
Researchers used computer simulations to capture the impact of restricting movement, found that the ban delayed the progression of the outbreak in China by only three to five days. The coronavirus had already made its way to other major Chinese cities by the time the restrictions were put in place.
"And the travel ban there certainly didn't stop the spread of disease from China to all over the planet," said Ira Longini, a biostatistician at the University of Florida, Gainesville and a co-author of the study.
Longini's team is the process of calculating the effect of the US's travel restrictions. "But we think we already know what the results will be," he said.
From a historical perspective, there's little evidence that travel restrictions have been effective in stemming previous epidemics.
"In ancient Rome when they would have epidemics just burning through the city, they would often lock the gates to not allow anybody else to come in," said John Swartzberg, a clinical professor emeritus of infectious diseases at UC Berkeley's School of Public Health. "But the problem was it was already inside and spreading in the city."
Gates and walls didn't spare the Romans from a plague, and locked borders don't seem to have helped much since. Closed borders during the Spanish flu outbreak in 1918 and 1919, did protect some areas, but also blocked supplies from reaching others.
In a study published last month in the Journal of Emergency Management, researchers attempted to review the effectiveness of travel bans in decreasing the spread of Ebola, Sars, Mers and the Zika virus – and found that they were only effective in the short term.
"Of course, modes and routes of transmission are different for different diseases," said Nicole Errett, an expert on public health emergency preparedness at the University of Washington's School of Public Health who led the study. "But there's just not a lot of evidence that travel bans will eliminate risk of disease."
If at best a travel ban may be futile, at worst - it could be harmful. "It perpetuates the idea the problem is out there, not here," said Hanage. "It perpetuates the idea that somehow, we might dodge this."
Travel bans can and have cause huge disruptions to people's personal and family lives, and they also fuel racism. There are economic consequences, too, affecting not only those who work for airlines and airports but also those who depend on travel for their jobs.
"Travel bans are generally more unhelpful than helpful, and there are so many more important things that could be being done," said Hanage. "And yet, instead we're talking about this. It's frustrating."
Susie Cagle contributed reporting