Sanders and Biden cancel primary night rallies over coronavirus concerns
In light of the outbreak, the Democratic National Committee announced that it would forgo a live audience for its next debate
Bernie Sanders and Joe Biden both hastily canceled primary night rallies on Tuesday over coronavirus concerns, as the Democratic National Committee announced that its upcoming debate would be held without a live audience "at the request of both campaigns and out of an abundance of caution".
As voters headed to the polls in six states – Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Idaho, North Dakota and Washington – the Bernie Sanders campaign announced they were "heeding the public warnings from Ohio state officials" and would not hold their scheduled rally on Tuesday night. The cancellation came via a statement shared online.
"Out of concern for public health and safety, we are canceling tonight's rally in Cleveland," the statement read. "Sen Sanders would like to express his regret to the thousands of Ohioans who had planned to attend the event tonight."
Biden, who was due to hold an election night rally in Cleveland, canceled his own shortly after. Kate Bedingfield, Biden's communications director, said the rally would be canceled "in accordance with guidance from public officials and out of an abundance of caution". Biden planned instead to speak to reporters in Philadelphia, where he also was expected to address the coronavirus crisis.
The announcement comes are more states implement emergency measures to combat the deadly coronavirus. The cancellation of the dueling rallies also marks the first time that a presidential campaign has axed an event because of the outbreak. It comes hours after Ohio's governor, Mike DeWine, recommended people stay away from large gatherings, including large campaign events. Donald Trump said he will not consider canceling his rallies and is not worried about risks.
The Democratic National Committee, meanwhile, will move ahead with a decision to hold the next presidential primary debate, taking place in Arizona on Sunday, without a live audience because of health concerns. The debate will take a "town hall" format in which each candidate answers questions from voters. Sanders and Biden will face off one-on-one before the votes are cast in Arizona, as well as Florida, Illinois and Ohio.
Both candidates have criticized the Trump administration over its response to the coronavirus, which causes a highly contagious and sometimes fatal respiratory illness.
The disease has so far sickened almost 1,000 people in the United States and killed 29, mostly in Washington state. Washington also conducts its primary on Tuesday, although voting in that contest occurs by mail.
Both campaigns said they would consult with health officials about future events.