Amazon, Microsoft and Facebook advise employees to work from home
Announcements made following coronavirus guidance from Washington state officials instructing workplaces to allow employees to work remotely
As the coronavirus outbreak continues to spread across Washington state, Amazon, Microsoft and Facebook have advised their Seattle-area employees to work from home for the next few weeks.
The announcements were made following guidance that instructed workplaces to take steps to allow employees to work remotely.
A statement from health officials read: "Taking these measures can help reduce the number of workers who come into contact with Covid-19 and help minimize absenteeism due to illness."
As of Thursday, Washington had reported 70 cases of the virus, with a total of 10 deaths. The majority of the cases are in King county, which includes Seattle.
Amazon sent an internal message Wednesday night to all area employees, recommending that if they can work from home, they should do so until the end of March.
"Every team is different and not all work may be conducive to working from home, so please talk with your manager and your team to establish expectations on working remotely," read the message obtained by the Guardian.
On Tuesday, Amazon, which is headquartered in Seattle, said one of its employees in Seattle had tested positive for the coronavirus. According to an internal message, the individual went home feeling sick on 25 February, and has stayed out of the company's offices ever since. The employee is reportedly currently in quarantine.
After a Facebook contractor in company's office in Seattle contracted coronavirus, the network closed the office for the rest of the week. The individual reportedly last visited the office on 21 February.
﻿Amazon has over 45,000 employees in a sprawling corporate campus in downtown Seattle. Facebook has about 5,000 employees in the Seattle area. Microsoft has nearly 54,000 workers in Washington state, where it has its headquarters in nearby Redmond.
Mark Hallenbeck, an urban policy professor at the University of Washington, said: "The restaurants will do less business; the shops will sell less stuff. That might be good. They can send their employees home. That's great for not spreading the virus; it's terrible if you're an employee desperately looking for work hours."
Microsoft officials said it is recommending all employees in their Puget Sound area offices, near Seattle, and in California's Bay Area, who are able to work from home, do so until 25 March.
The company also told employees who do come in to "limit prolonged interactions and try to stay more than 6fers away from others," and keep all meetings as short as possible.
Facebook chief Mark Zuckerberg said in a post on Tuesday that if someone searches coronavirus on Facebook they will be directed to the World Health Organization or a local health agency with information. Facebook has also reportedly given free ads to the WHO.