Amazon employee in Seattle tests positive for coronavirus
Worker went home after feeling sick on 25 February, and has stayed out of Amazon offices ever since, according to company
An Amazon employee in Seattle has tested positive for the coronavirus, according to an internal message sent on Tuesday afternoon.
The employee went home after feeling sick on 25 February, and has stayed out of the tech company's offices ever since, according to the message from Amazon Human Resources, which was sent to most Amazon employees in the area and obtained by the Guardian. The employee is currently in quarantine.
All other employees who came in close contact with the individual have been notified, according to the message. The employee worked out of the Brazil building, which is located blocks away from the Amazon Spheres, the company's giant greenhouse domes in downtown Seattle. The company said it defined close contact as "closer than 6ft/2 meters over a prolonged period of time".
The mega corporation has over 45,000 employees in Seattle, so a coronavirus outbreak could hold potentially huge economic and social consequences for the city and state as a whole.
Washington state is currently at the center of the US outbreak of the virus, with 27 confirmed cases of coronavirus by Tuesday afternoon, including nine deaths. The majority of the cases are in King county, which includes Seattle.Most coronavirus infections cause mild symptoms, but for some at a higher risk, including older people and those with chronic illness, it can cause more severe symptoms. Officials think the virus spreads mainly through coughs or sneezes."The risk of transmission for employees who were not in close contact with this individual is assessed to be low," the Amazon note states. It instructs employees to stay home and seek medical attention if they have symptoms."Your health is our top priority and we are continuing with enhanced deep cleaning and sanitization in the office," the note states.Amazon has an internal website updated regularly that includes information related to the coronavirus for its employees. It explains to employees that if they're feeling sick with cold or flu symptoms, but they don't know if they have coronavirus, they should talk with their manager and HR about making arrangements to work from home. It also says they should not come to work until they're free of a fever for at least 24 hours.
On Friday, the company put a hold on all non-essential travel in the US and abroad, according to Reuters, which also reported that two Amazon employees in Italy were confirmed to have the virus over the weekend. Amazon has also announced that it would conduct some of its recruiting interviews by video, instead of in-person.
Other major tech companies are also implementing restrictions. On Monday, Twitter's chief HR officer, Jennifer Christie, wrote in a blogpost that the company is encouraging all of its thousands of employees to work from home in an effort to keep the virus from spreading. Google has announced that it's restricting all staff travel to South Korea, Iran, Japan and Italy, according to CNBC. And Facebook said it will not be holding its annual F8 developers conference, according to the Washington Post.