Coronavirus 4 March: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
The global death toll is 3,190 while more than 93,000 people have been infected in more than 80 countries. In China there have been 38 new deaths bringing the total to 2,981 and there are 80,270 cases in all.
South Korea, the nation worst hit by the outbreak outside China, reported 516 new cases on Wednesday, bringing its total to 5,328. In India, 15 Italian citizens have tested positive. There have been more infections recorded in Australia, Japan and New Zealand.
In the US, which has more than 100 cases, an Amazon employee tested positive in Seattle.
The coronavirus lockdown has wiped out demand for shopping, eating out and going to the cinema in China, according to a key survey. The Caixin/Markit services purchasing managers' index (PMI) almost halved for February to 26.5 from 51.8 in January. It was the first drop below the 50-point margin on a monthly basis since the survey began in late 2005.
Supermarket chain Woolworths has said it will start rationing toilet paper as panic buying leaves store shelves empty across the country, which has 41 cases of Covid-19. The company announced it had "moved to apply a quantity limit on toilet paper packs" limiting customers to four per purchaser to "ensure more customers have access to the products".
A national ceremony was due to be held in Tokyo on 11 March, exactly nine years after a powerful earthquake and tsunami killed more than 18,000 people and triggered a triple meltdown at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant. It has been called off in an attempt to stop the spread of the virus.
The US vice-president has said public health authorities are issuing guidance that a doctor's order is needed for any American to be tested for novel coronavirus. The US would begin screening all travellers coming to the US on direct flights from Italy and South Korea, he said. The US death toll stands at nine.
The World Health Organization chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has warned that masks, goggles and other protective equipment used by health workers are running out amid panic buying. "We can't stop Covid-19 without protecting our health workers," he said. The prices of surgical masks had increased sixfold while the cost of ventilators had tripled, he said.