Coronavirus: health experts concerned US hospitals are not prepared
Lack of training and communication have led to fears of medical facilities becoming overwhelmed with an influx of cases
Panic over coronavirus in the United States has manifested in extreme ways. The stock market is widely fluctuating. Stores are running out of hand sanitizer. The streets of local Chinatowns are empty.
Health experts say there is good reason to be concerned, but not because people will not be able to get their hands on masks or have little time to stock up on food in case of a pandemic. Instead, what is slowly starting to keep them up at night is whether the US healthcare system is prepared to properly handle an influx of cases.
Experts say there is a worrying lack of training and coordination and that the system as a whole needs to be able to communicate more effectively.
At the moment, it is impossible to predict how widespread coronavirus will be in the US. Last week saw the first confirmed cases from people who had no travel history or contact with known coronavirus patients. As of Monday morning, four people had such cases.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has released guidelines for hospitals and healthcare professionals to follow to prevent the spread of any infectious respiratory disease, including coronavirus.
All hospitals have a pandemic preparedness plan that they should brief all their employees on as the illness becomes more serious in the US, said William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine and infectious disease at Vanderbilt University Medical Center.
"Every institution ought to be re-educating everybody about appropriate respiratory precautions," Schaffner said, including training new employees on protocols to deal with infectious, respiratory diseases like coronavirus.
But some nurses in the medical field say that training and information has not come in a timely manner.
A survey of 1,000 California nurses from National Nurses United, the largest nurses' union in the country, found that 47% of nurses were unsure if their hospital had a plan in place to isolate patients with possible novel coronavirus infection. Almost half were unsure if their hospitals have enough personal protective equipment, such as masks, to protect staff in the case of a rapid surge of cases.
"We are absolutely concerned that the nurses are not getting the relevant information in a timely manner. A lot of hospitals state that they have a plan, but that plan has never been disseminated to the nurses," said Catherine Kennedy, a front-line nurse in Roseville, California, and a secretary for the California Nurses Association, the California chapter of National Nurses United.
Making sure that nurses have the proper protective gear to deal with patients with coronavirus is the top concern, Kennedy said. "When we're told one thing – that you should be wearing a thicker type of gown [when dealing with a possible coronavirus case], but yet when you go to take a look at the cart, they don't have those gowns – that's a real concern."
The protection of healthcare workers is the key concern for Peter Hotez, dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas.
"If they go down, the whole thing falls apart and destabilizes," Hotez said. "That is the place where things could go wrong very quickly."
Hotez also emphasized that hospitals in rural areas should be getting funding to help handle a potential outbreak of the illness. "Some of the large counties [have] outstanding health departments. They're well-staffed, well-run machines. Some of the rural counties are not going to have the capacity for this," Hotez said.
Schaffner and Kennedy both said that hospitals needed to make sure that they were communicating with each other and collaborating when necessary.
"Hospitals need to learn how to cooperate … These are institutions that don't naturally often collaborate," Schaffner said, noting that collaboration was often orchestrated by a local health department.