A porter's story: 'The hospital in Covid-19 times reminds me of a disaster movie'
Parts of the hospital are like a ghost town, but I work with a great group of lads and they've helped keep my spirits up
In a hospital, the doctors and nurses are a bit like the star strikers. And behind them are the porters; we're the midfield that keeps everything moving.
We are living in a strange and difficult time. I've never been in a situation like this. It reminds me of a disaster movie with everyone wearing face masks.
Covid-19 has put an incredible strain on us, with some staff having to self-isolate. My partner displayed symptoms so I took 14 days off. She had a headache, a cough and a high temperature for three days before she started to recover. I woke up one day feeling rough, but that was it.
The uncertainty is probably the worst aspect of this situation. At first there was a lot of nervousness because no one was sure about anything. We got a lot of different messages. That's settled down now and people are getting on with it; patients are always the priority.
I first started as a porter three-and-a-half years ago. I love it. Before, I worked in Tesco and Manchester airport. The main things that appeal to me are the walking – I do around 10 miles a day – and being able to help people.
The feeling I get from helping others is addictive. Pre-coronavirus I'd often see an older gentleman arrive at the main entrance who couldn't walk and had to get to the clinic. I'd arrive with a wheelchair and see a look of gratitude and relief on his face. I come away from situations like that feeling great. I've never had that in other jobs.
Porters don't just transfer patients. We take dead people to the morgue. We also move beds on and off wards, transfer equipment, collect blood from the blood bank to take to the wards, change gas cylinders on resuscitation trollies, and remove dirty laundry and waste from clinical areas.
I remember the first time I had to transport someone who had died to the morgue. I was really nervous and unsure of how to handle them. It was strange at first but I'm used to it now. I feel so sorry as I take them to the mortuary – the journey can take 10 to 15 minutes depending on how far away the ward is. I know, however, that death is part of life.
As we go, us porters will try and distract each other, talking about what we've been up to outside of work. Maybe we're trying to escape our own mortality by not looking directly at death.
My job hasn't changed since coronavirus hit, but the surroundings have. We wear personal protective equipment and there are more restrictions on the wards. Covid-19 patients are kept behind closed doors. A&amp;E has been split in two and there's a one-way system.
No visitors are allowed, there are no clinics on, and day surgeries have been cancelled. Parts of the hospital are like a ghost town. It's been weird going along the corridors that are empty when they're usually packed full of people.
I see how hard it is for patients. They have real breathing difficulties; you can hear it when they take a breath, it's chesty and noisy. We try to have muffled conversations through masks. There's a lot of, "Eh? What?" I can see people are scared so if they're able, I try and get them talking about their life outside of being a patient.
I take patients to the intensive care unit. We're not allowed in so we take them to the door and knock. Someone comes out and takes the patient in. If I can, I'll wish them good luck. They're not always conscious, and are strapped up to many devices.
The numbers of people who die has remained roughly the same, I'd say, but everyone now seems to have been victim to the virus. Less people have been coming through A&amp;E, although there was a spike on VE Day.
I work with a great group of lads and they've helped keep my spirits up. We rip each other apart all the time and it's such a laugh. If you think about work and what we're faced with too much, it could get you really down. There's been such camaraderie with our other NHS colleagues too. We feel like we're all in it together.
I find the NHS to be quite the unique place. It's a slow lumbering beast, but the people who work in it are amazing. I feel privileged to work as a porter.
Paul Jinks is a hospital porter in north-west England