No 10 says scientific advisers will return to Covid-19 briefings
Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance have been regulars at Downing Street daily updates
Downing Street has insisted that England's chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, and the chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, will reappear at Downing Street briefings "in the next few days", amid the continuing furore over Dominic Cummings' lockdown excursions.
Whitty and Vallance, who have become the most prominent of the government's scientific advisers during the pandemic, were seen going into No 10 on Monday, with journalists told shortly before 5.30pm that the pair would appear at that day's briefing.
The press conference was then delayed by half an hour to 7pm – and in the event, Boris Johnson was accompanied by Yvonne Doyle of Public Health England.
Monday's press conference took place after a lengthy public statement by Boris Johnson's chief adviser in the No 10 rose garden, in which he insisted he had travelled 260 miles from London to County Durham to self-isolate so his family could help care for his four-year-old son.
Asked when Whitty and Vallance would next appear at a press briefing, Johnson's official spokesman said: "You can expect to see them in the next few days."
Pressed on whether the pair had been asked by anyone in No 10 to give their verdict on Cummings' lockdown travel, the spokesman said: "It's not a question I would expect a civil servant to be asked."
He added: "The prime minister has set out his view, and did so on Monday evening. He said that he's satisfied with the explanation that Dominic [Cummings] has given."
The two have been a regular fixture at the daily press briefings, with Whitty even inspiring mugs, T-shirts and an "appreciation society". Ministers have repeatedly leaned on the claim that they are following scientific advice to explain critical decisions about the handling of the Covid-19 outbreak.
Some scientific advisers to the government have suggested the perception that senior government figures believed they could bend the rules with impunity risks undermining public commitment to observing the lockdown.
Prof John Drury, who sits on the behavioural sub-group of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), told the Guardian on Wednesday: "We know that there is understandable public anger over the Dominic Cummings incident and Boris Johnson's defence of it, and that this anger is the basis of some people now rejecting the guidance on staying at home."
He was speaking in a personal capacity, but disquiet about Cummings' actions comes at a sensitive moment, as Sage prepares to decide on Thursday whether it is safe to recommend the government goes ahead with plans to loosen the restrictions next week.
Part of Downing Street's initial defence of Cummings' cross-country trek in pursuit of childcare rested on remarks from Whitty's deputy, Dr Jenny Harries, who said at a press conference earlier in the pandemic that parents of young children might be a special case.
But when she was asked about Cummings' movements at Saturday's press conference, Harries said: "If you're symptomatic, you stay at home, take yourself out of society as quickly as you can and stay there, unless there's extreme risk to life."
Johnson has faced a growing revolt from Conservative MPs since Cummings' statement, and his own defence of his chief adviser. More than 30 backbenchers, including senior former ministers, have called for him to resign or be sacked, amid a flood of furious messages from constituents apparently unconvinced by his explanations.