Government accused of cronyism after ex-Tory MPs given tourism roles
Patrick McLoughlin and Nick de Bois appointed despite apparent lack of direct experience in sector
Two former Conservative MPs have been appointed to senior tourism jobs despite an apparent lack of direct experience in the sector, prompting accusations of cronyism within government.
Sir Patrick McLoughlin and Nick de Bois have been given roles at the British Tourist Authority and VisitEngland respectively, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) said on Wednesday.
McLoughlin, who stepped down as an MP at December's election, has been made chair of the BTA board, which is the ultimate governing body of VisitBritain, the UK's main national tourism quango. The role pays £40,000 a year for an average of two days a week.
McLoughlin was an MP for 33 years, firstly for West Derbyshire and then the newly created constituency of Derbyshire Dales. A former miner, he held a series of ministerial posts.
While one of these roles was transport secretary, McLoughlin does not appear to have direct experience of the tourism industry. That contrasts with his immediate predecessor, Steve Ridgway, a former chief executive of Virgin Atlantic who also ran his own travel company, owned a hotel and chaired a ferry company.
De Bois held the Enfield North seat from 2010 to 2015, and was later chief of staff for Dominic Raab, when he was Brexit secretary. Aside from politics, his background is in the events and exhibitions sector.
He has been made chair of the VisitEngland advisory board, another part-time role, which will pay up to £16,320 a year for a maximum of four days work a month on a three-year contract.
De Bois also replaces a person with extensive tourism experience. Denis Wormwell had spent 30 years in the travel, hospitality and transport sectors, including co-owning Club 18-30, setting up an airline, and running the now-defunct holiday group Shearings. Ridgway and Wormwell were both appointed in 2017 for three-year terms.
Labour said the selection of McLoughlin and De Bois appeared to show clear favouritism. The MP Ben Bradshaw, a former culture secretary, said: "By handing out plush appointments like these to former Tory MPs with little relevant experience, the government are furthering the impression they believe it's one rule for them and their chums, another for the British public."
The appointments come at a critical time for the UK tourism and heritage sector, which have been severely hit by the coronavirus pandemic and will suffer even more from a planned mandatory 14-day quarantine period for people arriving in the UK.
Speaking to the Commons culture, media and sport committee last week, Patricia Yates, the acting chief executive of VisitBritain, said the tourism sector expected to lose £37bn from the impact of Covid-19.
VisitBritain has predicted there will be a £15bn drop in income from overseas visitors.
A government spokeswoman said: "Both roles were filled through fair and open competitions, regulated by the commissioner for public appointments, in accordance with the governance code for public appointments.
"Candidates were assessed by an independent advisory panel who found that both Patrick McLoughlin and Nick de Bois had the relevant experience and skills to meet the requirements of their roles."