Up to 40% of staff tested at hospital after Covid-19 patient contact had virus
Unions call for answers after admissions stopped at Weston general hospital to halt the spread of the virus
A hospital that this week shut its doors to new patients in a bid to control a Covid-19 outbreak has said that as many as 40% of staff from a cohort tested after contact with infected patients were found to be positive.
The development comes amid heightened concerns about the spread of coronavirus among NHS workers after the trust governing Weston general hospital in Somerset said there was "an emerging picture" of staff with no symptoms testing positive.
Authorities atthe hospital in Weston-super-Mare faced calls on Wednesday to respond to a claim – based on what a local media report said was a message from a staff member to colleagues – that as many as 40% of those who have been tested were found to have the virus. A spokesperson for University Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS foundation trust later told the Guardian: "This was 40% of a limited group of staff who worked with Covid-19 positive patients."
All staff were now being tested at the hospital, which stopped taking admissions, including into its A&amp;E department, from 8am on Monday "to maintain patient and staff safety" as a result of a high number of infections.
Unions wrote to hospital authorities on Wednesday to seek urgent answers to questions about testing, which has been offered for symptomatic staff and household contacts across the trust since the beginning of April.
Concerns were expressed by staff about why testing had not been being rolled out for everyone at the hospital rather than just for those with patient contact. There were accounts of some being told that they could not have tests, even though cafe workers and scaffolders were spotted in a queue to be swabbed.
Amarante Dias, an endoscopy decontamination technician at the hospital, died from Covid-19 on 13 April.
Members of the public were being told on Wednesday that it was unclear if the hospital's A&amp;E would remain closed on Thursday.
University Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS foundation trust said in its update on Tuesday evening that all inpatients have been tested for the virus and there was "appropriate segregation in place for patient care".
The trust's medical director, Dr William Oldfield, said testing all staff in clinical areas at the hospital who may have had some patient contact was under way.
He said: "There are currently a high number of patients with coronavirus in the hospital. We have tested all inpatients and will undertake retesting in line with national guidance, and we have appropriate segregation in place for patient care.
"Testing for symptomatic staff and household contacts has been offered across the trust since the beginning of April. In addition, there is an emerging picture of asymptomatic staff testing positive for the virus.
"Any members of staff who have tested positive have self-isolated in line with national guidance. We are also in the process of testing all staff in clinical areas at the hospital who may have had some patient contact."
The hospital provides clinical services to residents in north Somerset – a population of about 212,000 people. It had experienced a "spike" in infections, according to the local MP, John Penrose.
While the cause of the spike was unclear, doctors have been worried about a mini-resurgence in localised areas. Amid sunny weather and a recent bank holiday, concerns have been raised about what some described as an influx of visitors to Weston-super-Mare since the easing of lockdown rules.
Penrose said local health chiefs had told him on Wednesday that there was no evidence to show if recent cases were caused by cross-infection in the hospital, seafront visitors or something completely different.
"They're running tests which should prove the source, but we won't know until the results are in."
Local people reacting to the hospital closures included those raising concerns that those being diverted to other healthcare providers in the region could spread infection, and others shielding due to underlying health conditions but who had gone to Weston hospital for routine tests and treatment.
-key-workers
"I don't think it would be right for anyone to suggest that those concerns are not real and genuine as people are genuinely nervous," said Mark Canniford, the town's mayor.
"We are waiting for the NHS to tell us exactly what is happening."
Its closure to new admissions comes after a study recently revealed that a fifth of coronavirus infections among hospital patients and almost nine in 10 infections among healthcare workers may have been caught in hospitals.
Dr Michael Head, senior research fellow in global health at the University of Southampton, who was not involved in the research, said on Wednesday: "There is increasing evidence of numerous asymptomatic cases, and we also know there is transmission in other cases at least a day or two before symptoms develop."
Oldfield said there are "appropriate levels" of personal protective equipment (PPE) available and added that "there have been significant efforts to minimise unnecessary staff movements across the hospital".