Covid-19 got rough sleepers off England's streets. The question is what happens next
With cash and commitment on rough sleeping, the clock is now ticking to ensure gains made during the crisis are not lost
The Covid-19 pandemic unleashed a wave of horror, but also made something remarkable happen: it prompted the government to tackle the crisis of rough sleeping engulfing the country.
Between 2009 and 2019 there were huge increases in the numbers of rough sleepers. Official figures show that rough sleeping increased in England by 141%.
Just before Christmas 2019, the prime minister announced that the government was committed to ending rough sleeping by November 2024.
This was not the first time that a government pledged to end rough sleeping and few of us in the sector were holding our breath. When Covid-19 hit, I suspect I wasn't alone in anticipating that the pledge would be forgotten.
But following the announcement of lockdown at the beginning of March, people realised that rough sleepers were physically unable to follow government advice to stay at home. They were not only at enhanced risk of contracting the virus, but also a huge potential risk to the rest of population. Whichever worried the government more, it resolved to act: now, to all intents and purposes, rough sleeping in England has been largely solved as a problem.
Rough sleeping has certainly not been completely eradicated, but the drop has been huge. The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government has estimated, in meetings with housing providers, that about 6,000 rough sleepers have been moved off the streets. How was this done? On 27<sup> </sup>March the government's new homelessness tsar, Dame Louise Casey, wrote to homelessness managers and rough sleeping coordinators demanding action within 72 hours to get rough sleepers off the streets. By 15 April, offers of safe accommodation had been made to 90% of rough sleepers.
Local authorities in England, acting in uncharacteristic haste, procured rooms in hotels that were empty due to the lockdown, and as well as rehousing the estimated 6,000 rough sleepers, have also subsequently arranged packages of support for them. The government has even paid for the accommodation and support of those without recourse to public funds [NRPF], something that is unprecedented and has made a huge difference.
At the same time, the factors that often kept people on the streets in the past have largely disappeared. Many struggle with the idea that some people choose to sleep rough, but the the messy reality is that they can mistakenly believe it is in their best interests to remain on the streets. Part of this is undoubtedly linked to the generosity of the public, while there has also been a significant increase since the 2008 crash in street kitchens and soup runs providing free food. Overnight those two sources of sustenance vanished.
Covid-19 has also changed the profile of potential rough sleepers. Here in the West Midlands, we are seeing more young people come to us who were "sofa-surfing" between various friends' houses and can no longer do so. Sadly, more people are also coming to us following the breakdown of relationships. Domestic violence, already one of the top three causes of homelessness in the UK, has seen a much-publicised increase during the lockdown.
For the first time I can remember, rough sleeping is not being greeted with a collective shoulder shrug. For once, YMCA staff know that even if we can't help someone, there is a real commitment to keeping people off the streets across all of our local authorities and, crucially, cash from central government to back it up.
Most local authorities feel they have done everything they reasonably can to encourage people to take up offers of accommodation, and have rehoused people who have not accessed services for years. With a bit of political will, the end of rough sleeping is now a realistic possibility.
But expenditure on achieving this result has already gone well beyond the original £3.2m funding. One local authority director of housing I spoke to said his council had spent its £17,000 allowance within two days. At some point, hotel chains will want their rooms back and homes will have to be found for people.
This week the government finally announced its plan for locking in the recent gains. Crucially, the commitment to ending rough sleeping will be backed by bringing forward £160m of funding this year, to find long-term housing forthe thousands of rough sleepers currently in emergency accommodation.
In the March budget, £381m had already been announced for rough sleeping services. This is now extended to £433m – funding that will ensure 6,000 new housing units will be put into the system, with 3,300 becoming available in the next 12 months. The government has also recognised that more is required than accommodation. It is particularly welcome that the new funding increases by 37% the amount available to support rough sleepers and help them stay off the streets for good.
Interim accommodation is being committed by several providers – YMCA alone is contributing 300 existing spaces across England. And, with some universities predicting a drop of at least 80% in the numbers of foreign students, student accommodation likely to be vacant over the coming months could also be used. This would buy the sector time to build new, permanent units.
There is still ambiguity about what will happen to people with NRPF status who are being accommodated at public expense on public health grounds. They could make up as much as 40% of the total 6,000 or so people accommodated under the programme.
With huge strides having been made to eradicate rough sleeping, it would pile tragedy upon tragedy for people to be turned back out on to the street. This week's announcement reduces the chances of that happening. But the clock is undoubtedly ticking to ensure progress already made can be maintained.
Alan Fraser is chief executive of YMCA Heart of England
This article was amended on 27 May 2020. An earlier version referred to Alan Fraser being the chief executive of YMCA Birmingham. He holds that post with YMCA Heart of England.