Greggs to reopen 800 stores from mid-June
Slimmed-down menu will include bakery chain's popular vegan sausage roll
Greggs' popular vegan sausage roll – and its bestselling meat equivalent – are to make a return next month, after the bakery chain revealed it is to reopen 800 stores across the UK from mid-June.
The move follows a successful trial of the reopening of a handful of branches in the north-east this month, when Greggs tested safety measures put in place to protect staff and customers.
The chain temporarily closed all its 2,050 stores on 24 March as lockdown restrictions came into force, even though the new government rules specified that kitchen areas could stay open for takeaway orders.
It subsequently changed its mind about plans to reopen 20 of its locations, fearing that enthusiastic customers might gather in crowds.
A Greggs spokeswoman said: "We have planned and delivered robust shop trials using our new operational safety measures and they have progressed well, allowing us to now move to open an increased number of our shops from mid-June."
It will be offering a slimmed-down menu, but its vegan sausage roll and longer-established pork version will feature, along with hot drinks.
The UK's fast food and coffee shop chains are accelerating their reopening plans now that the initial lockdown is gradually being eased. UK restaurants and pubs have been allowed to prepare food in their kitchens for collection or delivery in spite of the lockdown, with many providing free meals to NHS staff and other key workers.
McDonald's has reopened 33 drive-through restaurants in London and south-east England with more to come in the north, while Burger King has reopened about 50 branches for drive-through and delivery. At the weekend KFC hit the milestone of 500 restaurant openings – more than half its 964-strong estate in the UK and Ireland, including 350 drive-through outlets.
On Tuesday the chicken chain Nando's announced the reopening of a further 54 outlets for delivery and click and collection across the UK and Ireland, with 40 more due to reopen on Wednesday. It had until now only reopened six for delivery orders in London and Manchester, and click-and-collect to customers at other sites including Belfast, Maidstone, Sevenoaks and Worcester.
All delivery orders placed through the Nando's website are eligible for reward points, which can be redeemed when the restaurants open their doors for a full dine-in service later in the year.
The menu will be reduced to help the team maintain social distancing in the kitchen and food preparation areas, but Nando's favourites such as peri-peri chicken wings, butterfly chicken, halloumi sticks and peri-peri chips will all be available to enjoy at home. Designated waiting areas have been set up for drivers and collect customers, and order volumes will be monitored to avoid queues building up.
Subway has reopened 600 of its 2,600 sandwich stores across the UK and Ireland. The Leon chain, which remained open for takeaways and providing meals for NHS workers, has just reopened two of its busiest London restaurants, in Canary Wharf and London Bridge.