BBC presents indoor flash mob for lockdown
Artists commissioned for Culture In Quarantine series designed to 'create snapshot of UK' amid Covid-19 crisis
Swan Lake performed in the bath, a virtual rave set in a living room, and sign-language performance art inspired by the balcony musicians of Lombardy, are three of the new commissions announced by BBC Arts for the creation of "a powerful snapshot" of the UK during coronavirus lockdown.
Among the commissions is Transcendence: making a digital rave, by the singer-songwriter Simon Shlomo Khan , which takes the form of interactive theatre.
The performance, which started off life as a successful Edinburgh fringe show, will be broadcast on Zoom. It is a digital adaptation of his 2019 Edinburgh show Surrender – which was described as "part gig, part confessional, due to his interweaving experiences of depression into the theatrical work.
Up to 50 other households globally will be able to join in and interact with Shlomo as he performs Transcendence in his living room, and others can watch online as the story unfolds.
"It's going to be a digital flash mob rave moment, but broadcast on the BBC," he said. "All artists are being forced to innovate and do something different. I didn't want to do the same as the stuff that was already out there on Twitch and other platforms, I wanted to do something that would scare me."
The 25 commissions are backed by Arts Council England (ACE) and are part of the BBC's Culture In Quarantine programme, which is designed to "keep the arts alive in people's homes" during the Covid-19 lockdown measures.
Other work among the commissions include Corey Baker Dance's Swan Lake Bath Ballet, a three-minute dance film set to Tchaikovsky's Swan Lake theme, which features global ballet stars performing in their baths, and Cathy Mager's Sign Night performance piece, which uses sign language to "illuminate the streets of Bristol with mysterious film projections revealing deaf culture in lockdown".
There is also Somina "Mena" Fombo's Home Carnival, which will be choreographed by Precious of carnival fame, and include a virtual parade through back gardens and homes. And there will be a 10-part podcast series named Decameron Nights by the 1927 Theatre Company, taking inspiration from the seminal text and retelling folk tales from around the world.
Jonty Claypole, director of BBC Arts, said: "The commissioned art works have a breadth of viewpoint, tone and innovation, offering something for everybody. Together with similar schemes we have in all the nations these projects are providing a powerful snapshot, both for now and posterity, of our country during lockdown."
The successful artists had applied to the BBC and ACE, and the selection process was managed by The Space, a digital agency and production company charged with promoting wider engagement across the arts.
Tony Hall, the BBC's director-general, said Culture In Quarantine was meant to help stimulate "imagination, thought, and escapism" during the lockdown. Earlier commissions had included The Big Book Weekend, a three-day virtual books festival, and Front Row Lates, which featured episodes filmed in Mary Beard's study featuring guests, including Margaret Atwood.
The newly announced pieces will be shown and broadcast across the BBC channels, including BBC Radio 3 and the BBC Sounds app, and via the BBC Arts website.