One law for Dominic Cummings, another for the rest of us
Readers respond to the Guardian exclusive revealing that Boris Johnson's key adviser had breached lockdown rules after he was seen in Durham, 264 miles from his London home, despite having had symptoms of coronavirusNew witnesses cast doubt on Dominic Cummings's lockdown claims
My daughter and son-in-law are both doctors. They contracted coronavirus in March and both were ill for several weeks, their symptoms bad enough to have to spend some days in bed. They have two young children who were quarantined with them. All the grandparents are over 70, and live some distance away. At no time did any of us consider it appropriate, acceptable or indeed wise for them to drive to us in order to get help with childcare, or for any of the grandparents to visit them. They managed as best they could. I wonder what made it so different for Dominic Cummings and his family (Pressure on Dominic Cummings to quit over lockdown breach, 22 May)?Janet GalleyMilton Keynes, Buckinghamshire
Dominic Cummings was infectious when he travelled. He put many lives at risk on his journey. What did he touch when he refuelled? Who was within two metres when he paid? Who was near him when he was buying food and drink for the journey? Who else used the toilets the family used? What about the human rights of the people he was near as he was out and about?
Is this why tracking and tracing was stopped – because it would have interfered with the liberty to be above the law that he wanted for himself?
Others have stayed home and avoided going by vehicle in case a breakdown or an accident put people at risk and put a further strain on resources. As a teacher I ask what lessons are our young people learning about Conservative party values, and how to live your life, from the behaviour of our government?Name and address supplied
If Dominic Cummings' stay in Durham was as innocent as he claims, why did the briefing from the Downing Street spokesperson make no mention of his location? If the Cummings family were so sure they had broken no rules, why did Mary Wakefield not mention, in her Spectator piece, that they were not isolating at home, but 264 miles away?
It is not surprising that, on her return, Wakefield found London's lockdown full of "comical uncertainty". The uncertainty was in the minds of herself and her husband, who clearly had a very vague idea of what the words "Stay at home" could possibly mean.Sally BurchLondon
Michael Gove tweeted that caring for your wife and child is not a crime. Are we to conclude that all those who have followed government advice and stayed home and self-isolated while loved ones have been ill, and in some cases died, are simply too stupid to have understood the advice properly?Bill StothartChester
Dominic Cummings and Boris Johnson's actions in the early stages of the pandemic, and the virus spreading through the team of key decision-makers, tells us that they were not taking the situation seriously. The support of their activities by other government members at the weekend tells us that they still aren't.Dr Michael PeelLondon
If Dominic Cummings needed to travel to Durham for essential support from his family then maybe there is some excuse. But why did he go back to London? It was the return journey that was inexcusable.Dr Teresa LehaneMalvern, Worcestershire
Why such a deafening silence about Boris Johnson and Carrie Symonds going to Chequers after the prime minister left hospital? They were both still suffering from coronavirus, during lockdown, and their home is No 11 Downing Street.Pamela SkinnerLeighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire
Just three words: arrogance, entitlement, hypocrisy.Lynda AndrewsMarch, Cambridgeshire
Boris's poll-tax moment has arrived already.Chris BurrellWelwyn Garden City, HertfordshireJoin the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.comRead more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters