CQC under fire from care home body for failing to report true death toll to ministers
Damning letter says lack of proper data masked seriousness of the situation
The Care Quality Commission (CQC) has been accused of failing to alert ministers to the mounting death toll caused by the coronavirus crisis, despite having access to daily information about deaths.
In a damning letter to the care homes regulator, the Relatives &amp; Residents Association (RRA) accused the CQC of multiple failures to protect people in care, their relatives and care home staff.
Judy Downey, the chair of the RRA, which represents people in care and their families, said the CQC needed to speak up for social care, which has borne the brunt of the crisis. About half of all coronavirus deaths in the UK are believed to have been of care home residents.
"It is a legal requirement for providers to immediately report deaths in care homes to CQC," Downey wrote on Friday. "This information, had it been made promptly available, would have helped to inform the national picture much sooner. However, the CQC's failure to produce these figures urgently for public use resulted in the government not being made aware of the true seriousness of the situation in care homes."
During the initial phase of the crisis, ministers quoted ONS figures which relied on official death certificates where a doctor notes the cause of death. But those take about 11 days to process.
It meant that the first official acknowledgement of the true scale of the care crisis came on 21 April – four weeks after lockdown began – when the ONS announced that the number of care home deaths had quadrupled from 217 to 1,043.
The CQC said it had been sharing death notification data with the Department of Health "on a daily basis", but it changed its data collection methods on 10 April to make it easier to record Covid-19 deaths. Until this point, care providers had to describe each death by writing in a free text box but the resulting data "did not match what CQC was hearing anecdotally from providers".
After the change, the CQC asked providers to tick boxes on the online form and that data is being used by ONS to create weekly reports.
The latest ONS report shows that Covid-19 was linked to the deaths of 11,094 people living in English care homes between 10 April and 15 May, although researchers at the London School of Economics believe there may be more than 22,000 "excess deaths" during the crisis so far. There are indications that some care residents have gone into decline after losing contact from relatives because of lockdown restrictions.
In her letter to the CQC chief executive Ian Trenholm, the RRA chair also took aim at complacency about care homes at the start of the outbreak.
"It was clear from the outset that care services would be in peril and yet when Public Health England stated that 'it was very unlikely that anyone receiving care in a care home or in the community will become infected', CQC failed to speak out immediately to refute this ill-judged view," she wrote.
The commission eventually published detailed advice for care providers on 1 May, but this fell short of giving guidance on how homes should talk to worried families, Downey added, and "many remain anxious" about the impact of lockdown and the possibility that vulnerable relatives may be at risk of abuse because of a "lack of oversight and scrutiny".
"In addition, the regulator failed to openly represent the voice and needs of the sector for PPE, testing and tracing, and other much-needed resources," Downey said.
She called on the CQC to represent the rights of people living in care homes and use its "leadership voice" to speak up for the needs of care providers, as well as identify those care settings with a poor track record.
A CQC spokesman said it had been working with local authorities to source PPE for care homes and helped homes arrange online food deliveries when they had struggled to do so.
In a statement, Trenholm said: "Throughout the coronavirus pandemic our regulatory role and core purpose to keep people safe has been at the heart of all decisions we have made. This role has not changed – to ensure that health and social care services provide people with safe, effective, compassionate, high-quality care."
He said that they had decided to stop routine inspections to limit infection spread. "But we are continuing to inspect in response to whistleblowing concerns and where we see evidence of risk of harm, deliberate abuse, systematic neglect or a significant breakdown in leadership. We will use our powers, or work with the relevant system partners, to take action against those responsible where we find unsafe or poor care."Those who work in social care have never had a more crucial – or a more challenging – role to play. We will continue to support the adult social care sector and its staff as they do everything they can to keep people safe, but it is clear that more support is needed, from every part of the system, as these staff go to extraordinary lengths to protect those in their care."