'It's like the days of prohibition': demand booms for bootleg home-visit haircuts
Illegal haircuts are taking place across the country, and hairdressers say older people are most willing to break the rules
It turns out that normally law-abiding people will do anything to get a haircut. "My mum had one done last week. She had to wash her own hair, meet in the front garden, have a five-minute cut, and style it herself afterwards," says Niamh from Belfast. "She's such a good woman usually but all the short-haired older ladies are freaking out as they have more of a hairstyle."
Despite social distancing and non-essential businesses still being closed, scenes such as this are becoming increasingly common. Illegal haircuts are taking place across the country, and hairdressers say it is the older generation most willing to break the rules.
"We've had loads of requests for bootleg home-visit haircuts through every channel – text, email, social media and even an old-school postcard," says Mark Creed, a colourist who runs five salons in Oxfordshire. "It's like the days of US prohibition, and the service that we usually provide feels almost contraband. We've declined every request, even those with the promise of a garden cut and PPE."
Paul Metcalfe, a stylist from Leeds, says he has been asked by "loads" of his clients and neighbours, and requests have increased in the past few days. "I know people who haven't even stopped working all through lockdown, especially the ones with older clients," he says. "I'm self-employed so I've had to take the hit by respecting social distancing, and I wish others had too."While highlights have been the most requested service as they are tricky to do yourself, Creed says that younger people are more likely to request cutting and colouring tuition over video-calling apps. "We've been getting requests from all age groups but most are from women with short, gamine-cropped hair over the age of 60. So often the Jamie Lee Curtis ends up more like Kim Jong-un," he says.
According to the National Police Chiefs' Council's latest figures, more than 13,445 fixed penalty notices have been issued in England for breaches of government public health regulations. In Wales, the number is 799. Despite this, in London signs on lampposts are offering cuts with just a mobile number, and residents say it is tempting. "I'm wondering if I should try them or just do it myself," says Jane from south London.
It is also causing tension in the hairdressing community. A Facebook post, shared hundreds of times, warns that there are salons and stylists out there who are still working, and it is unfair on those abiding by government guidelines. It says that the whole situation has made the world realise how important the hairdressing industry is.
"Most people are being professional, and just because a few people make unfavourable decisions this should not tarnish the entire industry," said an Aylesbury-based stylist. Some are also worried they might lose business if clients go to another stylist during the restrictions.
Despite this, many are hopeful that it will not be too long before they can open their doors and correct some of the home jobs that have not gone to plan. However, Metcalfe thinks these clandestine cuts might be a taste of what the industry will look like from now on.
"It's not going to be a luxury service any more where you spend three hours in the salon having a cup of tea and a natter. It's going to be a different game. You'll get your trim and your fringe lopped off and be on your way."