Charities call for new youth corps to tackle UK virus jobs crisis
Alliance of 12 organisations says scheme will give young people opportunities and support recovery
A coalition of British youth charities is urging the government to back a "national youth corps" to create opportunities for school and university leavers facing the toughest labour market for decades. The alliance of 12 organisations argues that decisive intervention can "turn this looming disaster into an opportunity".
The new youth corps would guarantee at least the minimum wage for 16- to 25-year-olds in a range of work and training opportunities until the end of 2021.
"Instead of staring into the abyss, we could create a new model for mobilising and unlocking the capacity of our young people," said Chris Wright of Catch 22, one of the signatories in a letter published in today's Observer.
The Cabinet Office and Department for Work and Pensions are understood to be contemplating how to react, and a meeting with charities is planned for Wednesday.
British employers not acutely damaged by the pandemic will be askedto offer work or training. Other elements of the proposals include one-to-one mentoring to help young people, especially those from a disadvantaged background, prosper in the "new normal". Details of projects would be posted to a digital hub then distributed to local youth corps centres.
Anand Shukla, chief executive of mentoring charity Brightside, said: "The proposed national youth corps is the kind of bold new approach our young people urgently require, providing them with opportunity and purpose, as well as supporting the wider economic recovery."
Roger Harding of Manchester-based Reclaim, said: "As we come out of this crisis we need young people … to have both decent jobs and a voice in decisions that affect their lives."
Last week's unemployment statistics included the sharpest monthly increase since records began, with young working people disproportionately suffering from redundancy and a third receiving less pay than in January.