Coronavirus latest 22 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
About 80 million infants may have missed out on vaccines for diseases including diphtheria, measles and polio as a result of the disruption to healthcare services caused by the coronavirus pandemic, the World Health Organization says.
According to data collected by the organisation and its partners, the provision of routine immunisations for children younger than one year old has been hindered in at least 68 countries, causing disruption to vaccine programmes not seen since their inception in the 1970s.
Fighting has forced 660,000 people to flee their homes since the UN secretary general called for a global ceasefire to focus on handling the pandemic, an NGO says.
António Guterres reiterated his call for an end to conflict this week. But the Norwegian Refugee Council says that the UN security council has failed to provide leadership for ceasefires, peace talks or protection of civilians during the pandemic.
Two-week quarantines will be imposed on new arrivals to the UK from 8 June, with a £1,000 fine awaiting anyone who breaches the measure. The home secretary, Priti Patel, announces that mandatory self-isolation would not apply to people coming from Ireland, medics tackling Covid-19 and seasonal agricultural workers.
The UK government's chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, says the country's R number, which measures the number of people to whom each infected person passes the virus, is between 0.7 and 1 and that the epidemic is "either flat or declining in the UK and in most areas it is declining".
According to figures collated by the Africa Centres for Disease Control, the 54 countries in Africa have collectively identified more than 100,000 cases of infection. According to the interactive dashboard hosted on the African Union health agency's website, there have so far been 3,101 deaths across the continent.
Unlike other regions, particularly Europe, the coronavirus has been slow to spread across Africa. After the first confirmed case was reported in mid-February in Egypt, many countries responded with strict lockdowns.
German tax revenues for April fall by a quarter compared to the same month last year.
According to the finance ministry's monthly report, the central government and the 16 federal states pulled in about €39bn (£34.87bn). The revenue decline is most severe for income, corporate and air traffic taxes, the report shows.
The Madrid region and the Barcelona metropolitan area will be able to move into the next phase of lockdown de-escalation from Monday, the Spanish government says. The two regions have been the areas hardest hit by Covid-19, which has killed at least 27,940 people in the country, while at least 233,037 have become infected.
One of Europe's biggest music events, Exit festival in Serbia, is rescheduled for August. Originally meant to take place in mid-July in the northern city of Novi Sad, the fate of the festival was uncertain. But, as Serbia emerges from its lockdown without a major outbreak, its prime minister, Ana Brnabić, recommends the event can take place after all.