PPE fiasco shows the NHS should learn from Tesco how to spend its billions
Supermarkets reacted fast to the coronavirus crisis. The NHS must urgently change the way it buys goods and services too
The fiasco over shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) for NHS staff, care staff and other key workers in the UK has cost lives. It has also highlighted the need for speedy and comprehensive reform of the way the health service buys vital goods and services.
Recent failures have raised serious questions, including how a senior figure involved with NHS procurement in a hospital trust was able to make money by selling PPE privately, why 400,000 protective gowns bought from Turkey were not fit for purpose, and why Chinese ventilators that ministers heralded as vital to tackle Covid-19 were badly built, unsuitable for use in hospitals and potentially dangerous for patients.
As I have pointed out many times, when it comes to procurement, the NHS has a lot in common with major retailers. Both spend tens of billions of pounds a year in highly competitive global markets. The pandemic has certainly made clear just how much the NHS depends on supplies from other countries. Major retailers could teach it much about how to manage its massive procurement spend.
Like Tesco, the NHS needs a procurement operation headed by someone with the authority, accountability and resources to deliver key objectives. Supermarkets have had to react fast to the present crisis, and emergency plans to keep supply systems going have been vital. They have also acted to protect staff and customers, with measures such as protective screens at checkouts, one-way systems, limits on customers in store, social distancing signposting, trolley sanitising stations and regular deep cleaning.
In contrast, the past few weeks have shown not just what poor shape NHS procurement is in, but also the failure of previous reorganisations over the past 15 years. They failed because successive secretaries of state for health, including Andrew Lansley and Jeremy Hunt, did not insist that trusts had to use centrally negotiated agreements.
A new, centralised body should be built, using the best expertise from across the NHS, but which could supplement expertise by hiring staff from the retail sector. It could locate some team members in the main supply markets, such as China, and retain regional and major city teams for products and markets better handled regionally. Small one-off purchases and procurement management could still be done locally.
The government would have to face down opposition from NHS trusts, which may feel this would threaten their independence. This could be done through service level agreements (carrot) and threat of reduced funding for those that failed to cooperate (stick). Existing trust procurement staff and supply consortiums would need to be managed directly by the new organisation as quickly as possible.
The pandemic does seems to have finally forced home the message that trusts need to be compelled to buy goods centrally.
On 1 May, local NHS trusts were told to stop procuring their own PPE, ventilators, and a range of other products in high demand due to coronavirus. Instead, these goods will now be bought centrally to reduce competition for supplies, according to the Health Service Journal. Too late for the present crisis, though. Had the government heeded my call in 2016 for a coherent, integrated approach for NHS procurement, the PPE shortage might have been more manageable. NHS drugs procurement is already centralised: it's run by the Department for Health and Social Care Medicine Supply Team.
Questions need to be asked, too, about how the UK failed to join an EU-led joint procurement of PPE intended to maximise its purchasing power, and why lessons were not learned from 2012, when an earthquake in northern Italy wrecked medical equipment factories, causing supplies of vital dialysis equipment to dry up. The NHS had two main suppliers, but no one had realised that the supplies were coming from the same factory in Italy.
Agreed, measurable objectives must be the starting point for creating any organisation. For NHS procurement these should include:
price (including how we are doing compared to the rest of the world).
quality assurance.
service level.
sustainability of supply.
sourcing from socially responsible suppliers.
carbon reduction.
creating a UK manufacturing base that can contribute to the UK economy.
The main aim would be to give a new, central organisation and its boss the authority to create the world-class procurement function so desperately needed by the NHS and UK citizens.
Colin Cram is a public sector consultant specialising in procurement and the former director of the North West Centre of Excellence