Coronavirus: the week explained - 22 May
Hydroxychloroquine on trial ... approved antibody tests for NHS and care workers ... loss of smell taken seriously
Hydroxychloroquine: Trump causes alarm but global trial begins
Donald Trump caused medical jaws to drop around the world when he announced he was on a daily dose of the anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine to protect himself against the coronavirus. Doctors queued up to warn that the drug is not approved for treatment or prevention of Covid-19 and can cause an irregular heartbeat – and even death. Mention was made of the US president's weight as a potential additional risk. Even Fox News anchor Neil Cavuto expressed alarm, triggering a temporary falling out between the president and his favourite TV channel. "If you are in a risky population here and you are taking this as a preventive treatment to ward off the virus – or in a worst-case scenario, you are dealing with the virus and you are in this vulnerable population – it will kill you," Cavuto said. "I cannot stress enough: this will kill you."
By Wednesday, Trump was saying he would finish his course of the drug in a day or two. Meanwhile, a major global trial began to find exactly the answer Trump needs – will hydroxychloroquine and the older version of the anti-malarial, chloroquine, actually protect people against Covid-19? Hospitals in Oxford and Bristol were among the sites recruiting NHS workers to take a daily pill. The study is being led by Prof Nicholas White, a world-renowned malaria expert, at the Mahidol Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit in Bangkok. If hydroxychloroquine does work as prevention or as treatment, the UK will have stocks, having put out a tender worth £35m for firms to supply 16m tablets as part of a contract for drugs to be trialled or used against Covid-19.
Contact tracing complications
Contact tracing plans in the UK seem to be up in the air, as it emerged that the NHS tracing app trialled on the Isle of Wight would not now be ready for general use until 1 June, not mid-May as the health secretary, Matt Hancock, had said last week. The government says it has, however, recruited even more of the "shoe leather" contact tracers it said it would – 24,000 rather than 18,000 – although, of course, there will be no shoe leather involved as they will be calling people from home.
A group of retired doctors and public health directors who have been running their own contact tracing operation in Sheffield for a month, however, say the new teams won't find it easy. In their own pilot project, volunteers were unable to reach 39 of the 58 contacts of 13 positive Covid cases to persuade them to self-isolate, 29 of whom were care workers.
Around the world, those countries that started test, track and isolation programmes early and stuck with them, such as Germany, South Korea, Hong Kong, New Zealand and Canada, have generally done best at keeping the pandemic death toll down.
In the Science Weekly podcast Nicola Davis asks mathematician Kit Yates how useful global comparisons are when it comes to the coronavirus outbreak, given the huge differences in demographics and public health responses. And, as per a question from a listener, what is the best metric when doing such comparisons?
Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/05/19-56144-gnl.sci.20200520.ms.cv19_comparing_countries.mp3
Antibody tests approved
NHS staff and care workers will be the first to get the antibody tests approved by Public Health England next week, although whether that will be useful to them, apart from satisfying the urge to know whether they have had Covid-19, is still in question. Three lab-based tests have been approved for use, from firms Roche, Abbott and Cardiff-based Ortho, which has the advantage of being manufactured in the UK and also scored 100% specificity in its test – meaning it does not confuse antibodies from Covid with antibodies from other coronaviruses including the common cold.
Testing will show how many key workers have had Covid-19, but just because they have antibodies, they cannot assume they are immune. Among the unknowns are whether small or large amounts of antibodies confer protection, whether any immunity lasts and whether people could still be carriers and infect other people even though they don't get ill. But antibody testing will help scientists work out the answers to all those questions as well as figuring out how and where the virus has travelled in the UK. Tests already carried out suggest that 17% of Londoners have had the virus, said Hancock, but only 5% of people elsewhere in the UK.
Sense of smell
The four chief medical officers finally accepted that loss of smell and taste was a sure sign of Covid infection, and anosmia, which is the medical term, is now ranked alongside a new persistent cough and a temperature as cause for self-isolation and testing.
Prof Tim Spector of Kings College London has been a powerful influence on the CMOs and their advisors on Sage, collecting data from 1.5 million people who have downloaded a symptoms app. Spector believes tens of thousands of cases have been missed by the refusal to take loss of smell seriously, although Jonathan Van-Tam, deputy chief medical officer for England, brushed off suggestions of delay saying they acted once the evidence was clear.
Spector also thinks a small but significant number of people are suffering from the "long tail" form of the virus – basically an illness that goes on and on, maybe for as long as three months.
Efforts to stop drug monopoly resisted
The first-ever virtual World Health Assembly was as brief as it was tumultuous behind the scenes, with fierce lobbying from the US over a resolution to encourage countries to set aside patents when the long-awaited vaccines and drugs against Covid-19 eventually emerge, so that they are affordable for everyone. More vocal was US fury over the exclusion of Taiwan from the meeting – as usual – because of China's opposition to its recognition as an independent state. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, was said to have "blasted" the World Health Organization for "keeping out scientific expertise", although it falls to the 196 country delegates to vote Taiwan in or out.
However, the director general, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, struck a determinedly optimistic note. "Let our shared humanity be the antidote to our shared threat," he said.