Bereaved families call for urgent inquiry into UK Covid-19 response
Founder of Facebook group with 200 members claims lockdown delay caused avoidable deaths
A group of families of people who died from Covid-19 have called for an immediate public inquiry into the UK's coronavirus response, saying there is evidence the government is already trying to cover up its failings.
Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice UK, a Facebook group with more than 200 members, was founded by Matt Fowler, whose 56-year-old father, Ian, died on 13 April, and Jo Goodman, whose father, Stuart, 72, died on 2 April.
Fowler said the group was calling for swift inquiry into the response to the pandemic so far to stop the government from continuing to make the same mistakes. He believes the failure to impose a lockdown before 23 March caused avoidable deaths.
"This is such a traumatic way to lose someone," Fowler said. "People have become numb to seeing the numbers. All of these numbers are a life and a valued person. It is as if the people who have gone are insignificant. Every day families are joining us in mourning. These are not just numbers. These are lives and loved ones who are being taken too soon."
Speaking at Wednesday's Downing Street press conference, the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, said there would be a time for lessons to be learned after the crisis, but insisted the public wanted the government to focus on tackling the virus.
Ministers have been accused of attempting to blame the government's initial response to the pandemic on poor scientific advice.
"If the science was wrong, if the advice at the time was wrong, I am not surprised if people think we made the wrong decision," said the work and pensions secretary, Thérèse Coffey, on Tuesday, though No 10 later distanced itself from her comments.
The Royal Society of Edinburgh is among bodies to have called for an immediate inquiry. And more than 100,000 people have signed an e-petition, organised by the campaign group March for Change that calls for an urgent independent inquiry into the coronavirus response.
The bereaved families group is being supported by Elkan Abrahamson, a human rights lawyer who represented 20 of the Hillsborough families in the recent inquest.
"As someone who has been profoundly involved in a number of cases where the powerful have tried to hide their mistakes, I'm becoming increasingly concerned by the government's apparent failure to accept responsibility for at least some of the 40,000 or more deaths caused to date by coronavirus," he said.
"There are already worrying signs that we are heading for another state cover-up, in that we are not seeing a full and transparent presentation of the facts surrounding some decisions."
Abrahamson, who is head of major inquiries at the law firm Broudie Jackson Canter, pointed to the Coronavirus Act 2020, which removed the need for juries at inquests into coronavirus-related deaths and reminded coroners that Covid-19 fatalities were "deaths by natural causes" so may not require an inquest at all.
"It's therefore imperative to start a public inquiry now, both to allow for information to be gathered and to ensure the life and death decisions currently being taken by the government are scrutinised," he said.
This article was amended on 23 May 2020 to remove references to the British Medical Association supporting the families' call.