'I live in fear of the unknown': life in a refuge under lockdown
Refuges are a lifeline for women fleeing domestic abuse but Covid-19 has thrown up new challenges
Annie had endured two years of domestic abuse when the coronavirus lockdown restrictions were imposed. It was at this moment she finally started to believe her partner would kill her.
"You can't go out with anyone, there's no way to get away from it – you're stuck with it 24 hours," she said.
But the intensity of the lockdown prompted Annie to take a crucial step – she resolved to flee her home and seek shelter in a women's refuge.
Annie was taken into one of 21 refuges run by the charity Hestia across 10 London boroughs. While the experience has been life-changing for her, the Covid-19 crisis has thrown up new challenges for those living in protected accommodation, as well as the staff who are risking the virus to keep the services running.
Through interviews and diary extracts, Annie and two women in the Reigate and Banstead Women's Aid refuge in Surrey have provided the Guardian with unique insight into life there in the time of Covid-19.
"I was concerned about coming to the refuge – anyone would be – but if you know that you're going to be able to get far, far away then it's worth it," Annie said. "So you just have to go through all your fears and break them down a little bit."
Rebecca, who is pregnant and has children, found the first few weeks of lockdown hard.
"I'm trying to come to terms with the news of a lockdown, the virus, being pregnant, and in a refuge with other families that I have no control over how they should keep up with hygiene," she wrote in her diary.
"So many fears and questions linger in my mind. How will we share the toilets? We are told that [if] one of us gets sick they will use the toilet and the shower downstairs and that is where my room is."
Rebecca explains she and the other tenants agree to a cleaning rota to allow some social distancing. "Sharing the communal areas is becoming a sort of nightmare because you don't know if the people here have the virus or not," she wrote.
"I keep to my room as I consider myself a high risk. I am very anxious and worried when my kids go out to the back garden and interact with other children."
Rebecca is a migrant and has to apply for a destitution domestic violence concession, allowing her to claim public funds while applying to settle in the UK. She found the challenges of home-schooling in a new environment difficult.
"I now have to be a teacher to my kids and make sure they complete school work," she wrote.
"They are feeling disappointed but at least the whole country is on lockdown, not just us. So it doesn't make us feel disadvantaged. I try as much as I can to assure them."
Other children knock on the door in the refuge, which makes her anxious. She wants her children to feel at home but she is concerned about the virus. "I live in fear of the unknown," she wrote.
The women may feel anxious about the virus in the refuge but the staff are working hard to ensure they are in a safe environment.
Charlotte Kneer, the chief executive of the Reigate and Banstead Women's Aid refuge and a survivor of abuse, said: "The big worry is it's a communal living environment in the same way as nurseries; if one gets a bug it goes through the whole place. It's the same for us.
"We have 11 women, 24 children, in a small space where they're sharing facilities. We're trying to make sure that every day there's enough cleaning stuff.
"I'm worried that if someone gets it, they're all going to get it.
"We have a plan that if someone has it or suspects they have it, there's a bathroom only they and their children use. Only come out and use the kitchen when no one else is around."
Kneer's refuge can house up to 11 vulnerable women and 24 children at a time. It offers clean, furnished rooms with televisions and tea-making facilities, a communal living area and kitchen, and a large garden with playground equipment.
One member of staff is on site every day to hand out rations of food and toiletries.
Multiple support services have seen a surge in calls to helplines during the lockdown period but there are fears that the already creaking refuge system in England and Wales will not be able to cope with the number of women looking to flee abuse.
Sally, also a mother, said the lockdown had brought with it additional anxiety and frustration.
"But I would like to add, that no matter the delay and any problems we get, this is the best place to be under the circumstances of domestic abuse. First of all me and my child, we are safe. We receive a lot of emotional and practical support here.
"It was very helpful to understand how serious the abuse was that I went through, and how important it is to always keep my address secret and leave no chance for my perpetrator to contact me.
"The assurance that we did the right thing removing ourselves from abuse and understanding that it wasn't all just my sensitive feelings or overreaction went a long way in feeling more confident. Being manipulated for 10 years makes you doubt yourself in every thought you have and every step you make."
She had to take a Covid-19 test while staying in the refuge after a visit to hospital for a stomach sickness and high temperature.
While at the hospital, one of her children spent the night with one of the refuge workers – but social services recommended this was limited to the one night.
"It was difficult, he didn't want me to go without him and he was crying on my way out," she wrote.
"I was very worried about the Covid-19 test – if it would be positive, maybe my child had it too, then the possibility to pass it on to the woman who was looking after him, also my housemate who has asthma and her kids."
She was ultimately discharged and the test returned negative – but because she had visited a hospital she had to self-isolate for two weeks from the rest of the refuge, although her housemate offered to help.
"I was having difficult time accepting help. My ex-partner, that I spent 10 years with, he used to call me worthless and useless and ungrateful all the time," she said.
"Slowly he destroyed my self-esteem and my personality, I was just there to cook food and clean and take care of his needs.
"This left a very big impact for me to ask and accept help from anyone. Now not being able to do my usual daily things was making me feel anxious and stressed a lot."
She says that self-isolation compounds how isolated she feels having left her previous home.
"Refuge helped me a lot," she wrote, "it was a life-saving decision to move here, but there always comes the feeling of isolation.
"Having to go through lockdown and now self-isolation made it even worse, especially when you are sharing your home with another family, you don't really feel free at your own home, you don't even feel that you are at home."
The shortage in spaces in refuges during lockdown has sparked initiatives to offer safe accommodation with specialist support, such as the Covid-19 Crisis Project run by Solace and Southall Black Sisters in London.
There were 72 refuge vacancies in England on 3 April, compared with 170 on the same day last year. The Women's Aid Annual Survey 2017, carried out on a single day, found there were 3,557 women with 3,919 children and young people staying in refuges across all services in England.
Annie, Rebecca and Sally agreed to their names being changed for this piece to protect their identities