Hundreds of charities in UK added to waiting list for food redistribution
FareShare network distributed 3,208 tonnes of surplus food in April – double the usual amount
The number of frontline charities and community groups seeking help to feed the hungry from the UK's largest food redistribution organisation has tripled since the start of the coronavirus pandemic.
FareShare has added a further 500 charities to its waiting list, more than 80% of which are delivering emergency food parcels to vulnerable families and individuals at risk of hunger, its annual report said, as benefit claims and unemployment soar because of the virus.
The FareShare network is made up of 17 independent food redistribution organisations. The report said they redistributed more than 24,000 tonnes of in-date surplus food from the food industry in the last financial year, a 26% increase on the previous 12 months and the equivalent of 1m meals a week. This was used by almost 11,000 charities – including domestic violence refuges, breakfast clubs, food banks and day centres.
But in the month after lockdown was implement, the charity distributed 3,208 tonnes of food – double the usual amount – and enough to create almost 2m meals a week. In just one week in April, more people signed up to volunteer to sort, pack and deliver food for FareShare than in the whole of last year.
To help store and manage the additional food, the charity has recently secured another nine warehouses' worth extra capacity. It is now urging the government to cover the costs to producers and growers of saving surplus food from waste and sending it to charities, in order to tackle an expected rise in food poverty during and after the crisis.
Lindsay Boswell, the chief executive of FareShare, said: "When the crisis ends, the need for our food will still be there. In April alone 856,500 more people claimed benefits and job opportunities fell by a quarter. Many more people will fall through the gaps in society and need the support of frontline charities."
Even before the outbreak of the coronavirus, demand for surplus food had soared against a background of growing dependence on food banks and rising homelessness in the UK. The number of households with children going hungry has doubled since lockdown began, as millions of people struggle to afford food, according to data from the Food Foundation.
The Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: "We continue to support redistribution organisations getting food to those in need through our work with the Wrap Resource Action Fund. Most recently we provided a series of grants to help redistribution organisations both large and small respond to the impact of coronavirus. We will look to evaluate an earlier pilot programme and any further funding decisions will be made in due course."