'Very, very upsetting': students face tough decisions over university
Many feel uncertain about quality of education they will receive under restrictions to combat coronavirus
Thousands of students due to start university in September are feeling uncertain about what to expect, with online learning and physical distancing measures likely to be in place, with one in five considering whether to defer.
Many are worried about the quality of education they will receive, and have concerns about starting life away from home under a raft of regulations aimed at reducing the spread of coronavirus.
For those studying more practical, hands-on degrees, there are questions about whether these courses can be effectively transferred online.
"With medicine, especially at York, where I'm going to study, they put a big emphasis on developing interpersonal skills with patients, and being in a medical setting from really early on," said Amaala Malik, 19, who is starting a degree in medicine in September.
"We're supposed to be spending some afternoons in GP clinics by week three, but I can't really see a scenario where they let young medical students back into hospitals and clinics at the moment, and that aspect of medicine was the one I was most excited for. Hopefully by later years it'll be something I can do again, but developing those patient skills early on is really important."
Malik has already undertaken a gap year, so is hesitant to take another year out before starting her degree.
"Because medicine is such a long degree, the idea of taking another gap year is not something I've really considered," she said. "All my friends have already begun uni, and in a way, I don't want to be left behind."
The shift to online teaching has led many to question whether the high tuition fees are worth the education they will receive, with some opting to defer until the following academic year.
Dominik Wojciechowski, 21, is due to start a degree in music in September, but is trying to defer. "It's just a waste of money," he said. "If you don't have orchestral classes you don't get the experience of playing in an orchestra, which would prepare you for your career, and you won't be able to learn the repertoire and literature of music as well."
Alongside physical distancing, the potential lack of access to facilities and equipment was also a major concern for Wojciechowski.
"As a musician, practising on a high-quality instrument is very important, and [coronavirus measures] could take away that chance. It will definitely impact the course. If all those things are taken away, what am I actually getting?"
Many students have lost part-time jobs that supported them during university, leaving them struggling to fund their education.
Throughout her degree, Amy Tetsola, a 20-year-old marketing student at the University of Leicester, has had a zero-hours contract working various jobs in the hospitality sector. Since the coronavirus pandemic, this work has stopped. Tetsola is concerned about the financial implications of undertaking study without a part-time job, and has decided to defer her final year of study.
"Since I'm going into third year, you get lower maintenance loan than the other years, and I'm not going to be getting any money from a job. If I defer, I can work alongside my final year, and hopefully save up money [in my year out]."
Like Wojciechowski, she is struggling to reconcile the high tuition fee costs with the education she will receive.
"Given my third year is the most important year of my academic career, I don't want to compromise it by having everything delivered virtually. I'll pay nearly £10,000 for that year, and I may have to pay full fees for online teaching. It's not worth taking that chance," she added. "We're paying a lot of money to jump on a Zoom call."
Some courses will not allow deferrals because of coronavirus, and for many students, the risk of losing the place is too great to take.
"It's been a dream of mine for a long time to go to Cambridge, and part of me is terrified that if I was to reject the place and try again next year, it would be much more competitive because so many people will have deferred," said Emily, who is due to start her master's degree in September.
Emily said the loss of her dream university experience is "very, very upsetting".
"Those opportunities for networking are incredibly important, meeting those people is a huge part of the degree," she said. "How am I mean to make friends sat in a dorm room?"