Commons return will 'euthanise' MPs, Jacob Rees-Mogg is warned
Senior Tory backbencher attacks proposal to return to physical parliament in June
Jacob Rees-Mogg has been told by a senior Conservative backbencher that an attempt to return to a "physical" parliament will in effect "euthanise" MPs who are sick, shielding and self-isolating.
After the leader of the house confirmed the government planned to end the virtual parliamentary proceedings and force MPs to return to Westminster in early June, the former minister Robert Halfon said the proposals would discriminate and threaten the lives of some MPs.
"Is it really morally just to say in effect to MPs, because you are not Tarzan-like and able to swing through the chamber, beating your chest shouting to your constituents: 'Look, I am here!' that you are effectively euthanised from the Commons?
"MPs who are disrupted by this awful pandemic are not just old horses to be sent to the knackers' yard," he said.
Parliament is due to go into recess for two weeks for the Whitsun holiday on Wednesday.
Since the coronavirus lockdown was introduced in mid-March, members have been encouraged to work virtually, with only 50 MPs in the chamber being treated the same as up to 120 MPs appearing virtually. MPs have only been called to speak if listed.
Rees-Mogg said if schools and other businesses were reopening on 1 June, MPs should too when the Commons returns the day after.
"We have to recognise that if we persist with the present arrangement it will become harder to make progress in a timely fashion," he said.
"That is why, in line with government advice for those who cannot do their jobs from home, I am asking members to return to their place of work after Whitsun," he said.
Opposition MPs failed in an attempt to take control of the Commons agenda to enable a vote on how the chamber operates after the Whitsun recess.
Their amendment to the Wednesday timetable motion was not selected, although they continued to raise their opposition.
The Liberal Democrat Alistair Carmichael, who represents Orkney and Shetland, said he found the virtual arrangements "stilted and artificial", but added: "If it's a choice between that and putting the safety of members, their families and staff of the house at risk, then that is no choice at all and it should only end when safe to do so."
He said it has been reported the motivation for the MPs' return is to "get a support act" behind Boris Johnson at prime minister's questions.
Opposition MPs forced a vote on the original timetable motion but it was approved by 350 votes to 258.
Karen Bradley, the Conservative chair of the procedure committee, said the Commons "needs to be in agreement" with the way it conducts business and asked Rees-Mogg to "reflect" on the issue.
Some MPs wrote on Wednesday to the Speaker saying Rees-Mogg's proposals could create a two-tier House of Commons.
A letter signed by 35 MPs, including the Conservative chair of the women and equalities select committee, Caroline Nokes, and the Labour MP Stella Creasy, argued that a return to a "physical" parliament could mean that those in high-risk categories including BAME MPs, older MPs or those who are pregnant will be disproportionately restricted.
"As social distancing measures are reduced in a phased manner this summer, we are concerned that there is a risk of creating two tiers of MPs: those who are able to attend and those who mostly cannot given the ongoing challenges of lockdown and their own personal circumstances.
"Given what is known about the nature of this virus, and who is a high risk, it is likely that this will mean those MPs who are BAME MPs, older MPs or who are pregnant will be disproportionately restricted," the letter says.
Rees-Mogg has agreed that MPs' staff and parliamentary workers can continue to work from home, amid concerns they would be put at risk, following a meeting of the Commons commission on Tuesday.
Unions expressed their concern about Rees-Mogg's proposals.
Garry Graham, the Prospect deputy general secretary, said: "It is incredibly disappointing that the government has chosen to ignore the voice of staff and impose a full return to parliament in two weeks, including physical voting, that will mean hundreds of people packed into parliament's narrow corridors putting MPs and staff at risk."
