Fifth of patients with Covid-19 may have caught it in hospital, study finds
PHE research chimes with concerns that asymptomatic healthcare workers may have played role in spread
We would like to hear from key workers in the UK. You can get in touch by filling in the form \nbelow, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor\n adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your \ncontributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss \nfurther.
PHE research chimes with concerns that asymptomatic healthcare workers may have played role in spread
A fifth of coronavirus infections among hospital patients and almost nine in 10 infections among healthcare workers may have been caught in hospital, researchers have revealed.
The study, which has yet to be peer-reviewed, was released by a team of researchers from Public Health England (PHE) and is based on computer models of transmission of Covid-19 within hospitals.
The findings chime with recent revelations that an NHS England official told senior hospital figures in late April that 10-20% of hospital patients with Covid-19 may have caught the disease while in hospital for another reason. Concerns have been raised that asymptomatic healthcare workers may have played a role in spreading the virus.
A recent study of staff at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge revealed that 3% of more than 1,000 healthcare workers with no apparent symptoms tested positive for Covid-19, with 57% of those truly asymptomatic or having few symptoms, and 40% having had symptoms more than a week before the test during which time most self-isolated. Another study from a trust in the north of England found that 7% of its hospital staff tested positive for the coronavirus but had no symptoms.
While the reproductive number, R, is currently 0.7-1 in the UK, suggesting each infected individual is passing the virus to fewer than one other person, Sir Patrick Vallance, chief scientific adviser to the government, has previously said R may be higher in some care homes and hospitals. Boris Johnson has referred to the situation in care homes and hospitals as "twin epidemics".
The latest study uses computer models to shed light on the issue of hospital-acquired Covid-19 infections and is based on a number of assumptions, including that almost two-thirds of healthcare workers may be working while infected in the absence of testing, and that test accuracy is 100%.
The model is based on a scenario in which patients suspected to have Covid-19 on arrival at hospital are tested and then split into positive or negative groups, while those not suspected to have the disease are not tested and are admitted to other beds. Patients or healthcare workers with symptoms are also tested.
The team ran the model and examined what the situation would look like after 56 days, assuming a rising daily incidence in the community. The results reveal that over that time period 13% of admitted patients and 11% healthcare workers would have Covid-19, with 20% of cases among hospital inpatients and 89% of cases among healthcare workers down to hospital-acquired infections. The team adds that patients were the main driver of such infections, however healthcare workers also passed around the infection. However, the model has limitations including that it does not separate asymptomatic from pre-symptomatic cases.
The team also looked at measures to reduce hospital-acquired infections, including testing healthcare workers on a regular basis. "Daily testing was the most effective at reducing transmission with a reduction of 65% in [healthcare worker to healthcare worker transmission events], and 14% in [healthcare worker to] patient transmission events," the authors write.
The team also looked at what would happen if suspected Covid-19 patients were allocated separate rooms or bays while awaiting test results, instead of being grouped together – a move the team assumed would cut transmission. The model suggests that if the approach cuts transmission by 50%, it could reduce hospital acquired infections by 40% over the 56 days, while a 100% cut in transmission would reduce such infections by 80%.
"Although in practice as the number of community cases increases or the criteria for those patients to be tested changes, it may not be possible to use single rooms or bays, adherence to best practice early in an epidemic can limit the development of further infections and their subsequent effects on community transmission," the team write. "Further, this result has important implications when considering the design of temporary facilities such as the newly developed Nightingale Hospitals."
-key-workers
A PHE spokesperson said: "The model findings suggest approximately 20% of patients with Covid-19 may have caught the virus in hospital. This equates to around 2% of all admitted patients acquiring a SARS-CoV-2 infection while in hospital."
But they urged caution: "There remains a large degree of uncertainty around the estimates for many reasons and findings should be treated as preliminary."
Dr Michael Head, senior research fellow in global health, University of Southampton, who was not involved in the research, said: "[This] modelling paper suggests that most healthcare workers who have Covid-19 are infected by nosocomial transmission. This is unsurprising due to a few factors, including exposure within hospitals to patients with Covid-19, long hours spent working in healthcare settings and therefore also fewer hours spent in community settings."