Children in England to return to school before contact tracing app rolled out
Coronavirus tracing app expected in few weeks but some pupils return to school on 1 June
Children in England may return to school before the government's coronavirus contact tracing app is rolled out across the country, the work and pensions secretary, Thérèse Coffey, has confirmed.
The app which was due to be released in mid-May following its trial on the Isle of Wight is now expected in the "coming weeks" the minister said.
"I'm not aware that's been set as a condition that's necessary for the phased reopening of primary schools," she told BBC Breakfast. "I think it is better to get the app as good as we can make it rather than rush out an app and have to change it."So it's important that that trial, that pilot in the Isle of Wight, is allowed to run to its full length that's needed, rather than perhaps the target deadline that the health secretary has set."
The government has recruited 21,000 contact tracers as part of its test, track and trace strategy and the health secretary, Matt Hancock, had previously committed to the NHS app being ready for the rest of England in the middle of this month.
Reception, year one and year six are due back in smaller class sizes in schools on 1 June, which has prompted significant concern from teaching unions over staff safety.
The minister said the app is only one element of the tracing system the government is developing when it was suggested on Radio 4's Today programme that it may be needed to give people confidence to return to work and school.
"In terms of the app it's fair to say that we've announced that we will get that out as soon as possible but it's important on the app – and it's only one element of the tracing – is that we make sure we get it right," she said.
The £625 NHS surcharge that migrant workers from outside the European Economic Area must pay, even if they work for the NHS, and paid on top of visa fees, is correct in principle, Coffey told Sky News.
There has been criticism that foreign care workers helping with the coronavirus outbreak still face the charge, which is rising from £400 to £625 this autumn. Doctors, nurses and paramedics have been given a one-year exemption by the government.
"The health surcharge is for anybody outside the UK coming into the UK to live and work to contribute towards the NHS and it doesn't matter what profession you are in to undertake that," she told Sky News.
"The principle is clear that many people who have contributed taxes over many years when they never even use the NHS – I think it's important we recognise that it is there for people's lifetimes so when people come to this country and want to use the state health service I don't think it's unreasonable to ask them to make actually quite a modest contribution towards the running of the NHS."
Many care workers earn close to the minimum wage.