'I feel imprisoned': why loneliness won't be solved by national planners
As lockdown eases, the government's fixation on top-down strategy is risking the mental health of the loneliest citizens
Despite the easing of lockdown conditions in England, Ruth, like many people, is struggling with loneliness.
"I feel imprisoned," she told me. Since UK lockdown began on 24 March, she has been turned in on her own company in a way she has found surprising and upsetting. Surprising, because Ruth has lived alone, happily, for many years.
She's retired, so she doesn't have work to focus on, and she's still unable to see her close family, who are too far away to visit in a day. The shock to Ruth herself has been how quickly her motivation has ebbed: she doesn't feel like volunteering and from being a keen walker, now barely feels like getting out of the house for a stroll.
We don't yet know how many people may die as a result of being alone during lockdown, but we do know that loneliness kills; that even before lockdown, a third of UK citizens sometimes felt lonely; and that lockdown is already having a huge impact on people's wellbeing.
Technology can help many people. But a recent survey of 500 people by the care provider Elder found that 28% of respondents weren't confident using technology, and that one in five of those aged over 70 were speaking to family or friends less than fortnightly.
Charities such as the British Red Cross and the Jo Cox Foundation have urged the government to act. The government has responded by relaunching the loneliness campaign, first announced in 2018, , by pledging £5m to national loneliness organisations. Despite the additional promise on 21 April to "prioritise" community-based organisations, the grants available are only for organisations in England and range from £0.5m to £1m – grassroots bodies are explicitly not able to apply if their turnover is less than £2.5m.
It is typical of a government, and its advisers, that seem either incapable or actively unwilling to learn from and build on local initiatives. Rather than facilitate and properly resource communities, it continually plumps for centralised and usually outsourced systems. Take Serco's controversial Covid-19 tracking, or Deloitte's testing, which has left GPs and councils in the dark about local hotspots.
It is ideological idiocy. And now the government is applying it to one of the most basic of human needs: human interaction.
A central campaign to tackle loneliness makes sense only if the government can allocate resources to local groups and then step out of the way, according to Alex Smith, the founder of the Cares Family community network, which brings younger and older neighbours together in five areas.
For Smith, the flaws of a centralised national programme are clear. Take, for instance, the fact that 750,000 people responded to the government's call for volunteers to support the NHS. Nearly a month on, most are frustrated at not having been given anything to do. But at the same time, hundreds of thousands of people are checking on and supporting their neighbours. It illustrates, says Smith, the huge divide between national schemes and local action.
Some central intervention would be welcomed by activists like Smith, who wants a new bank holiday, Neighbour Day, as in Australia; a new national honour to recognise neighbourliness; and the former Department for Exiting the EU, now disbanded, to be regrouped as a department for connectedness, to provide valuable resources for local groups.
But national decision-makers can't call our parents for us, and government policy can't on its own create more neighbourliness, says Smith. We also need local change. It's one of the great contradictions of British life, he adds, that while 72% of UK adults believe knowing our neighbours is important, 73% do not know their neighbours themselves.
That may be changing under lockdown, with activities such as clapping for carers on a Thursday, or streets forming their own WhatsApp groups to share information and resources.
Organisations like Citizens UK are building on their existing contacts across churches, mosques, trade unions and schools to put people of all ages in touch with one another.
That's particularly important, because it's not just older people whose loneliness is exacerbated by lockdown. The government's own annual community life survey shows that young people aged 16-24 are more likely to report feeling lonely than older people. A new survey by King's College London is asking young people what they have found most helpful to manage social distancing from their friends and peers.
Lockdown restrictions may be starting to ease but the shock for so many people like Ruth, who have now experienced the grimness of their own four walls day after day, needs to be recognised. For her, a weekly online chat with friends provides a much-needed social connection. Empathy, gratitude and looking out for one another locally may just might get us through this.