Commuters in England report more traffic and busier trains
Passenger numbers high enough to cause anxiety about distancing and face masks
Many commuters experienced nerve-racking journeys to work on Monday as the number of train services were increased to reflect the easing of coronavirus travel restrictions in England amid government pressure for people to return to their workplaces.
Demand for travel remained low and rail passenger numbers at the busiest stations were 93% below average during the morning, with Transport for London saying tube passenger numbers were 8% of the same day last year.
But some commuters were anxious at the lack of pressure to wear face coverings.
"It was less packed than usual, but busy enough that I felt uncomfortable and anxious," said a veterinary surgeon, Vanessa Adams, who commuted from Upminster, on the outskirts of east London, into Fenchurch Street station.
"More women than men were wearing face masks, up to only around 40% of people overall, and the commute takes longer as there are fewer trains than usual."
But some things never change, she added: "Even during a pandemic at 7am, you still get men yelling sexist comments at you."
A broadcast journalist, Madeleine Watson, said she had been travelling to work in Westminster throughout the lockdown and, while her commutes had been tense at first due to overcrowding, they became more relaxed as many people stayed at home.
"The trains were sometimes so empty I would sing aloud for fun," she said.
Now, she said, it was busier.
She objected to the suggestion of the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, last week that he would not get on a crowded bus or tube. "It was a bit of a slap in the face for people who don't have any other way to get to work," she said.
She said that early in the pandemic it seemed more people wore masks than were doing so now. "I don't want to judge police officers or TfL workers, but they are not wearing them either."
Government guidance for England states that people should, if possible, wear homemade face coverings in enclosed spaces where physical distancing is not possible.
However, the World Health Organization says "use of a mask alone is not sufficient to provide an adequate level of protection".
"Some were wearing face masks but the bulk of people weren't," said Catherine Day, who travelled by train from Manchester to Wigan. "I was under the impression it wasn't mandatory, but I had a scarf with me in case I had to cover my face if it got crowded."
With relatively few people travelling, other hygiene issues were of greater concern for Day. "They didn't have any soap in the ladies' toilets at all at Manchester Oxford Road railway station," she said. "I was a bit disgusted, considering the fact they are telling you to wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds, so I put a complaint in."
Northern Trains tweeted that it had asked for the soap to be refilled and it was sorted out in around two hours.
Many people outside the capital usually drive to work rather than taking public transport. One commuter, Andy Brown, said his journey from Chester to Manchester – which normally takes up to an hour and 20 minutes – took almost three hours on Monday.
"There may have been an accident that caused it all, but equally it could have been the roadworks they started whilst it was quiet, which are now causing issues as car volumes begin to return to pre-Covid levels," he said.
"I've spent the entire lockdown working so have seen it go from tumbleweed to today's scenes."
Back in London, a seamstress, Zoë Kinsella, who has recently resumed going into work, was frustrated at people not distancing, although her trains have been generally quiet.
"I have tried wearing a face mask but it was so uncomfortable and it made me feel more on edge," she said. "I try to stay out of people's way and keep the 2-metre distance, but some people don't seem to be adhering to it at all."
Some names were changed