'The same boat': how Facebook brought together those bereaved by Covid-19
Yellow Hearts To Remember was set up by David Gompertz to do justice to the scale of loss
When she walked out of Harrogate hospital where her 58-year-old husband Leo had just died after contracting Covid-19, Joanne Ciavarella said she had never felt more alone in the world.
"I wasn't allowed anyone else with me. I had to walk out that hospital and drive home on my own knowing that my husband had just died," she said. "I don't know how my legs carried me."
She then had to recover from the virus herself at home, self-isolating with her 13-year-old son and unable to see her friends or her parents, who are in their 70s. So when she came across the Yellow Hearts To Remember Facebook group, it became a lifeline.
"I was absolutely desperate for that contact and to know that other people were having the same experiences, and the grief that I was going through alone was normal to some extent," she said. "I've had so many Facebook messages from people I don't even know saying: 'We're in the same boat.'"
The group was set up by David Gompertz, 83, with help from his family, after losing his wife, Sheila, to the virus. He felt the government's daily death toll figure didn't do justice to the scale of the loss from Covid-19, and wanted to create a group encouraging the bereaved to pin yellow hearts in their window, as a symbol of remembrance.
"I thought, if people as they walk the streets actually saw the extent of yellow hearts in their neighbourhood, it might tell them [how many have really died]," he explained.
But since the group's creation a couple of weeks ago, it has grown into something much more – a warm and welcoming community of thousands sharing stories and pictures of lost loved ones.
"I just do two or three minutes and weep, because the people on there are all sizes and shapes, ethnic groups and ages. It's just devastating," Gompertz said. "And we don't own it anymore. That Facebook page is owned by all those people who posted."
One of those is Charlotte Compton, whose dad, 91-year-old James Jones, died in April after contracting coronavirus.
Like many she faced the difficulty of organising a funeral and having to choose which family members were able to attend.
"The toughest thing for me was, at the funeral, not being able to hug my family," she said. "A social media platform is no substitute for that at all, but it's comforting to have some kind of virtual love from people you don't even know but who understand everything that you're going through."
She also came across another Facebook group which encourages people to light a candle in their window at 8pm every Sunday to remember those who have died.
"It sounds quite small, but I really found it very comforting," she said. "I felt calm and peaceful because I just felt everybody who is in a similar situation can feel a sense of belonging and togetherness, some unity which somehow makes grief more bearable."
Online groups and helplines have become crucial in bereavement support during a time when face-to-face interaction is no longer possible. Widowed and Young have recorded a significant increase in people joining their members-only website and Facebook group, up 12% on last year.
While digital tributes are offering some solace to people grieving for coronavirus victims, families are now calling for a more permanent tribute. Ciavarella has written to Boris Johnson asking for his support in planting a forest of trees, one for each victim of the virus, as a lasting memorial.