Coronavirus latest: at a glance 18 May
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Italy registers 99 more deaths on Monday, the lowest daily rate since early March, and 451 new infections, down by more than 200 since Sunday.
There is also a significant fall in new infections in Lombardy, the region worst affected by the virus, from 326 on Sunday to 175 on Monday.
A total of 14,790 people died in April in Belgium – the worst toll since the country was under Nazi occupation in the 1940s, according to a study. The total is substantially higher than the normal April death toll, which is usually fewer than 9,000 people, researchers from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) find.
The country's Department of Health and Social Care releases its latest daily figures, which show a further 160 deaths, taking the total to 34,796.
Enforced quarantine measures at the UK border expected to be unveiled this week are to cover arrivals by sea, car and international rail, as well as air, the Guardian understands.
Travellers will be asked to quarantine either in accommodation of their choice or provided by the government if there are no other options. An implementation date has not yet been announced.
The French president, Emmanuel Macron, and the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, are to present a joint plan to spur EU recovery after weeks of debate over how to deploy billions of euros needed to quickly end a painful recession.
Continental European nations are just beginning to emerge from lockdowns that have taken a huge bite out of their economies and raised the prospects of recessions that could last for months.
The European Union may give an initial approval for sale of the drug remdesivir as a Covid-19 treatment, the head of its medicines agency says, fast-tracking the drug to market amid tight global competition for resources.
The US, which has angered the EU with aggressive tactics in a procurement race, has yet to issue a similar approval for the drug. Demand for it has been growing as there are currently no approved treatments or vaccines.
The pandemic should serve as a wake-up call to a world that must be more united, the UN secretary general, Antonio Guterres, says.
Guterres says Covid-19 is the "greatest challenge of our age" and has demonstrated the world's fragility, as nations go their own way. He adds that the crisis is an opportunity to rebuild a better world, but questions whether countries are up to it.
Monday's overnight death toll in Spain is 59, the lowest figure in two months, the country's government says. The cumulative death toll rises to 27,709, while the number of confirmed cases increases to 231,606 from 231,350 the previous day, according to health ministry figures.
UK government ministers may be undermining public trust in science in the way they talk about it when defending their decisions, a leading scientist and broadcaster warns.
Prof Brian Cox says he is particularly concerned about ministers saying they are just "following the science". The Royal Society professor for public engagement with science says the "politicisation of science or scientific advice might deliver some short-term political advantages … But, this will have, I think, serious long-term consequences because it undermines public trust in science."
Visitors are allowed to return to Saint Peter's Basilica in the Vatican after more than two months of lockdown. A handful of visitors queue up, observing social distancing rules and under the watch of police officers wearing face masks, before having their temperatures taken to enter the church.