Half a million access UK suicide prevention training amid Covid-19 warnings
Surge in participants during lockdown as NHS group warns of virus's 'mental health legacy'
More than half a million people have been given suicide prevention training in the last three weeks by a UK charity which is warning about the potential impact of Covid-19 on the nation's mental health.
The Zero Suicide Alliance, a collaboration of NHS trusts, charities, businesses and individuals, revealed that 503,000 people had completed its online course, which aims to spot the signs that a person needs help, during lockdown.
The recent surge in the numbers taking the free course means that more than 1 million people have completed the online suicide prevention training since the charity was founded in 2017.
It comes after concerns were raised about the mental health of frontline workers tackling the coronavirus pandemic, with NHS England launching a hotline to support staff last month. In 2018, there were 6,507 suicides registered in the UK, according to the Office for National Statistics, three-quarters of them among men.
The alliance's co-founder and chair, Joe Rafferty, said the true impact of the coronavirus on mental health was not yet known but warned that "the stress and worry of the coronavirus is bound to have impacted people's mental health". Speaking to the BBC, he added: "Suicide is a serious public health issue and every single death by suicide devastates families, friends and communities."
The charity's online training, which takes around 20 minutes and is funded in part by the Department of Health and Social Care, takes participants through how to help someone who may be considering killing themselves, as well as tackling the stigma around suicide and encouraging open dialogue. A shorter introduction module, taking up to 10 minutes, is also available.
In a letter sent earlier this month to the health secretary, Matt Hancock, the shadow minister for mental health, Rosena Allin-Khan, a doctor, said staff needed access to post-traumatic stress disorder support and talking therapies, and that monitoring for increased suicide risk should be put in place. "NHS and care staff are breaking down – I see it first-hand, working shifts. It is simply heartbreaking to see the toll this virus is taking on our frontline staff," she said.
It came after a mental health hotline, open between 7am and 11pm, for NHS staff was launched last month. Health workers are able to call or text the free number, which is staffed by specially trained volunteers.
The NHS Clinical Leaders Network, a professional network for clinicians in England, is warning that the pandemic is likely to prompt an increase in mental health problems for frontline health workers which needs to be prepared for.
In a paper released on Monday, the group said that past outbreaks showed "we can expect notable increases in mental ill health and related issues for frontline workers as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic".
It added: "While preventing the spread of Covid-19 is still a public health priority, we're saying that this emergency will also leave a mental health legacy in its wake, a legacy that could inflict a damaging toll on NHS and other frontline staff as well as the public at large."
The group added that urgent action was needed so health leaders did not "wait until this problem is upon us".
In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.