UK Covid-19 briefing hit by Zoom technical issues
Journalists forced to submit written questions after outages of video conferencing platform
Users of the video conferencing platform Zoom reported outages on Sunday, with many unable to host or join meetings.
The website DownDetector said thousands of people were having issues with the service, and the UK appeared to have been particularly badly affected. Users began reporting issues with the app from 9am BST.
The platform's technical issues affected Downing Street's daily coronavirus briefing. Journalists are usually able to ask questions live on screen, but technical issues meant they had to submit written questions to be read out by the business secretary, Alok Sharma, who was hosting the briefing.
Zoom said later that the issues should be resolved if users restart their sessions.
"Zoom users impacted by this issue should now be able to host, join &amp; participate in Zoom Meetings &amp; Zoom Video Webinars if they restart their sessions. We continue to assess &amp; monitor. We sincerely apologize for any inconvenience this might have caused," the company tweeted.
The outages also interrupted churches' Sunday services in the UK and the US. "Imagine if door locks in churches across the country jammed simultaneously on a Sunday morning," Rev Simon Harvey, a vicar based in Bury St Edmonds, wrote on Twitter.
The video conferencing service's popularity has grown rapidly since lockdowns began worldwide and people use it to not only host business meetings but also social events, including calls with family and friends and, in the UK, pub quizzes.
In an indication of just how vital the platform has become to people's daily lives since lockdown, one social media user tweeted: "Zoom is down. The apocalypse is well and truly here."
However, issues have been raised with the platform's lax security, highlighted by "Zoombombing" incidents where trolls enter meetings uninvited.
The company's share price has surged since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic in January.