'I miss people terribly': the growing pain of older people's isolation
Many older people are in lockdown alone, and some of them feel they are wasting valuable time
"I don't think I'll be able to keep doing this for much longer, I won't be able to stand it," said Mary Fletcher, 81, who is in her ninth week of lockdown in her flat in London. "I'm starting to feel that having Covid-19 might be preferable to isolation. Next week I think I'm going to break it and see my family. I'm now prepared to take that risk."
Many older people in the UK are in lockdown alone. Being apart from family and friends, and often unable to leave the house because they are shielding, has left many struggling with isolation.
"Everything you're doing is on your own, and you start to realise how important it is to have human contact," Fletcher said. "To just have a hug, or give a hug, that sort of thing is important to human beings and if you're deprived of that, it does affect your wellbeing."
Fletcher's granddaughter does her shopping for her but has to leave it on the doorstep and remain two metres away. Her 14-month-old great-grandson has learned to walk during the lockdown, and is just starting to form words. Mary is worried about missing out on his key milestones.
For Thomas Allen, who lives in York, the pain of being separated from his family has been exacerbated by the loss of his wife, Elsie, who died a fortnight ago. They were married for nearly 59 years.
The couple had never spent time apart since they met 60 years ago, except for three weeks he spent away each year while serving with the Territorial Army from the 1960s to the 1980s.
Elsie had dementia and was living in a care home. The lockdown meant he was forced to stop his daily visits.
"I used to wonder about what she'd think of me not coming to see her," he said. "I thought she might think we didn't want her any more, and that's why we put her in a home. She couldn't understand what was going on in lockdown, that's why she gave up. She stopped eating and wouldn't take her medicine. I think the lockdown took her away from us."
While Allen is in touch with his family every day, he is feeling "low" without them. "I know they love me, but they can't come to give me a hug," he said. "They call and text every day, that's what keeps me going."
For others, the withdrawal from the fresh air and green space tantalisingly offered by the outside world is taking its toll.
Many older people have been instructed to shield because underlying health conditions put them at high risk of suffering from serious symptoms should they contract the virus. This group have been instructed to stay at home.
"I got quite upset when I was driving back from my last visit to the hospital, because the world looks so lovely at the moment," said Janet Boyd, 69. "The roadsides were full of cow parsley and wild flowers, I'm missing the spring and the summer. I'm very lucky because I have a garden, but it's not the same as being able to go out."
Boyd has incurable cancer, and the lockdown is making her feel she is wasting valuable time. "I'm not yet 70, but I know my time might be limited," she said. "To not be able to enjoy the things I do enjoy, and see my family, that's hard. I'm worried I might have less time with them than I would have."
"My fear is that I'll get this virus, and I could die without ever seeing them," she added.
Despite this, she does not believe lifting lockdown restrictions is the right thing to do. "It's very hard, but I feel safe where I am, and whilst I get a bit lonely, I'm protected from what's going on," she said. "Other people don't have that luxury. They're throwing lower-paid workers to the wolves to face the threat."
Many older people are also missing friends, activities and social life. "I miss people terribly," said Judith Payne, 80, who lives alone in a town on the Welsh borders. "I live in a friendly little town with shops at the end of my road, and normally when I go out I meet two or three people I know and we stop and pass the time of day. Since lockdown I haven't been to a shop."
Payne is actively involved in her community, as the chair of the local Labour party branch and a friend of the community hospital. She said it had been difficult to adjust to losing those social activities.
"The local film society has stopped, book group can't meet … all the things that were important to me as an older person without a job, without a purpose almost," she said.
Although she is careful to stay safe, Payne said she was not worried about contracting the virus. "I'm 80, I'm going to die of something. A friend said that she feels it's ruining her old age, and I feel like that. I've had to cancel holidays, I want to see my family. I like the train journey going to visit them in London."
"I haven't got enough time for this," she added. "My time is short and I want to enjoy it."