Reopen the schools or a generation will bear the mental health scars
Children's Covid symptoms are usually mild, but a lack of education can be severe
The plan for children to start returning to school in England has caused much debate about safety. Understandably, parents and teachers are worried about what this will mean for risk to children, and teachers are justifiably concerned about risk to themselves. I'm a hospital paediatrician who has been looking after children and young people with Covid-19, and have seen children unwell with it (including the small group with the widely reported systematic inflammatory syndrome). I also have responsibility for the mental health of children, and work in child protection. Finally, I am a parent of three children.
When the UK went into lockdown, closing schools made some sense, based on the concern that children might be key drivers of infection in the population, as for other viruses like influenza. We also didn't know how children might be affected by the infection. But even then, many professionals working with children were very worried about the relative risk of them not being in school.
It couldn't stay like that for ever. The challenge for everyone though is imprecision and uncertainty. When is it safe to go back, and what are the risks? It's likely no one is going to be able to give a firm answer for some time, so it is about balancing knowns and unknowns.
What we know about COVID-19 infections in children and young people is a patch-work story. Studies from where there has been more mass population testing for coronavirus have reported smaller amounts of infections in children. On Friday however, the ONS published data on screening for coronavirus infection in 10,000 households in England using nose and throat swabs. They found no difference in numbers with positive tests between children (2-19 years) and other age groups. We should be cautious: of 10,705 people tested, only 33 people actually tested positive, and these numbers are quite small to compare between ages.
Another key area of discussion has been how much children spread the infection. Some studies have found evidence for reduced passing on of the infection in children. But we should also be cautious about this. Children may still have the infection but show no signs of it which makes their infection and spread difficult to monitor. This all means that there is a need for more widespread testing, and this may well take a long time. There is no current evidence that children spread it more readily than adults.
I find myself coming back to the same question. Are we thinking about this the wrong way round – is it not more risky instead to keep our children at home? We know that children get Covid. I've seen it. But it is perhaps one of the observations of greatest certainties in the numbers from all of this that the vast majority of children who show signs of the infection have it mildly. Even the widely reported Covid syndrome of inflammation is rare. Unlike adults, deaths globally in children and young people with Covid have been rare, even in those with underlying health conditions like cancer.
Contrast this with what we already know about the health of children and young people before this. Over a quarter of child deaths in children and young people in England have modifiable factors such as family environment and access to services involved. On average, one child under 15 is killed every week – most commonly by a parent and almost always by someone they know.
Many children and their families are under significant pressure in their family environments during lockdown and we know that access to health and social care has dropped. Schools are a vital part of the provision of safeguarding children and families, after all around 20% of social service referrals come from schools. Then there is their mental health: 1 in 8 children has a mental health disorder. Rates are higher where families are struggling. A quarter of of young women aged 17-19 have a mental health disorder, and half of them have attempted suicide of self-harm. My colleagues and I have been seeing mental health crisis presentations linked to the effects of lock-down.
Schools play such an important role in the wellbeing of all children and young people – so much so that new emphasis on early intervention and treatment of mental health in school was a key part of the NHS Long Term Plan.But the importance of school, and their teachers, is not just for vulnerable children. As much as they try, all parents – including my wife and I – cannot educate as well as schools. Whilst for a short period that might have small influence for some, for many children this is potentially a disaster. The negative effects of adverse social determinants of health in children, in particular education, is well established. Children carry the effects on their physical and mental health throughout their lives, and as such childhood and adolescence are key windows for many life outcomes Right now, that gap is almost certainly widening with effects for many years to come.
There are of course myriad challenges to a return to school – like socially isolating children, and the risk of the adults who bring them to school interacting. The return has to be staged and monitored, and if necessary, pulled back. Those who are vulnerable from health conditions and those shielding should remain protected. One of the important stories of the pandemic in the UK will be those of the groups with quietest voices – and that includes very elderly and children. We find ourselves as individuals and as a society having to make decisions without exact certainty on what the best thing is for children. On balance, in my view, that is a structured return to school for children, and that goes for mine too.
Lee Hudson is consultant paediatrician and chief of mental health at Great Ormond Street