Rough sleepers must not be put back on streets after lockdown, says top Tory
The 'housing-first' approach should be used to help homeless people now sheltering in hotels, urges chair of all-party MPs group
Rough sleepers should be given permanent accommodation rather than being allowed to drift back on to the streets as the lockdown eases, according to the Conservative chair of the all-party parliamentary group for ending homelessness.
The majority of England's rough sleepers have been moved off the streets and into hotels to offer them protection during the pandemic.
Bob Blackman said the government should now seize the opportunity to introduce the "housing-first" model, which sees rough sleepers given a permanent place to live as a priority before interventions in any other issues in their lives. This initiative is already used by a number of other countries such as Finland and Denmark.
"It is my belief that the housing first model is the way to deal with what will be needed after coronavirus," he said. "Here, people who are rough sleeping are taken off the street and given a property, and then assessed as to what their needs are. Support is then placed around them, and any medical needs are attended to so that they can recover and move on to a normal way of life".
He said that while the government had done a good job to get the homeless community into hotel accommodation during the pandemic "there is no plan from the top yet" to ensure that people stay housed.
On Friday a leaked report suggested that government funding for the emergency scheme – Councils were given £3.2m in March – is to end. The government said it had given councils £3.2bn since March and urged them to keep supporting rough sleepers.
Neil Coyle, the Labour co-chair of the group, said the pandemic had shown that "when political will is there, it is almost possible to alleviate all rough sleeping in a week". But he also fears that this will not be a long-lasting success.
Last Wednesday at prime minister's questions, Boris Johnson was asked about plans to continue support following the pandemic. He was unable to confirm that any plans were in place.
There is growing concern among those working with rough sleepers that their number could increase once the lockdown is lifted.
Founder of The Big Issue, John Bird, said :"It is imperative that we plan now for what happens with the increased amount that will fall into poverty and homelessness because of the economic impact of coronavirus."
"We will have people who were OK before the pandemic but will now have their first taste of homelessness. The time has come for a radical new approach. We don't need more stopgaps, we need the real thing: change".
Mike Matthews, who owns the Prince Rupert Hotel in Shrewsbury, is among the many hoteliers currently providing accommodation to rough sleepers. "It was a huge task to get these individuals off the streets and into this hotel in the first place but now it is like living with a whole new, big family," he said.
"What we have seen has been remarkable. People are being rehabilitated, their physical and mental health is drastically improving." But he fears for what may happen if his guests all have to leave very suddenly.
Group member Daniel Zeichner, Labour MP for Cambridge, said that without a housing-first approach the future could be even bleaker for the homeless community. "There will be a terrible betrayal to those who have just opened themselves up to care."
Jinx has been self-dependent since he was a child, selling the Big Issue in several locations around the UK. Last month, he was contacted and asked to isolate in a Holiday Inn in Bristol.
"I've been looking after and providing for myself since I was a teenager. I've never once begged or signed on. I've sold the Big Issue in London and Bristol for most of my life."
Jinx was initially worried about trusting others with his care. "I've always looked after myself, and this felt like me now not being in control. But like a lot of other homeless people, I was scared and am still scared about this virus, so I knew that I had to hole up in a hotel."
He said he is "clueless" about what will happen to him after isolation. "I've not heard anything from the council or from where I'm staying. Me and the people that I'm with have been asked to change our lives completely, and it feels like we'll now be kicked out again at the end of it. It's a massive worry. It's the not knowing that's scary."
A spokesperson for the ministry of housing, communities and local government said: "Over 90% of rough sleepers known to councils at the beginning of this crisis have now been made offers of safe accommodation, backed by an unprecedented package of support for local government.
"We will continue to prioritise and support this effort and have provided £3.2bn to councils to deal with immediate pressures, including supporting rough sleepers.
"Our new rough sleeping taskforce – spearheaded by Dame Louise Casey – will work hand in hand with councils across the country on plans to ensure as many rough sleepers as possible can move into long-term, safe accommodation once the immediate crisis is over."