More young people using UK text counselling service since lockdown
Frontline workers twice as likely to mention anxiety when asking for help, Shout crisis line says
Thousands of young people and frontline workers are turning to a text advice line for people in crisis during the coronavirus epidemic, as counsellors report a rise in anxiety caused by the lockdown.
In the two months since Boris Johnson announced restrictions on normal life, an extra 6,000 people have contacted the Shout line and there has been a 10% increase in the number of people with anxiety. Shout often deals with young people in considerable distress, and suicidal feelings are the most common issue raised. Typically, two-thirds of people texting are aged under 25.
The helpline, which was launched a year ago with the backing of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and a £3m investment from the Royal Foundation charity, reported that frontline and key workers are twice as likely as others to mention anxiety. Conversations concerning Covid-19 peaked on days where there were significant announcements, such as those about school closures and other lockdown details.
Prince William spoke to volunteer counsellors this week and said he was concerned that the service was not reaching enough NHS workers.
"There is still quite a big stigma in the NHS about reaching out for support for mental health," he said. "Because many of them believe they are the place people go to for support and they shouldn't be asking others for support, which is wrong but that is the way they feel."
Counsellors told the duke and duchess they often received texts from frontline workers concerned about a lack of PPE and struggling with the conflict between continuing to do their job and isolating from their families.
In the weeks before lockdown was announced on 23 March, volunteers typically fielded 750 conversations a day but that has grown to more than 900 as coronavirus became an increasing cause for concern.
"During the Covid-19 lockdown we have seen young people are finding it useful to have a neutral person to listen confidentially to their worries over text, particularly when other support networks or services are not available or they don't want a phone call to be overheard," says Victoria Hornby, Shout's chief executive.
"Uncertainty and anticipation around personal and major life events has a significant impact on the mental health of young people, which settles when the picture becomes clearer. Lockdown at home can intensify difficult feelings and thoughts and our volunteers help people relieve this pressure and get to a calmer place."
Shout was launched to target young people more comfortable with texting than making phone calls or attending face-to-face counselling. The 85258 number handled 300,000 text conversations in its first year, with the most common issues raised being suicide, depression, anxiety, loneliness and self-harm.
The busiest two weeks in the first year of the service came after the suicide of the Love Island TV presenter Caroline Flack on 15 February. That triggered 3,000 more conversations than during the preceding two weeks, a 30% rise.
Across the whole year, people aged 18 to 24 were most likely to discuss suicide, even though people aged 45 to 49 are most likely to kill themselves in the UK. Under-13s were the age group most likely to discuss self-harm.
Around 40% of texters who were under 25 years old identified as LGBTQ+. Almost two-thirds said they "felt more comfortable texting than talking about private things" and had contacted Shout "to speak to someone that didn't know them".
Operators felt the need to call the emergency services for help 5,000 times in the last year over fears that texters might harm or try to kill themselves.