Johnson-endorsed barbecues are getting a cool reception
Caution and anxiety remain for many Britons, despite the easing of social gathering restrictions
With gloriously cloudless skies over north London on the eve of the lockdown easing, the only place to head yesterday morning was to the park – Friern Barnet Retail Park, conveniently located just off the North Circular road. Here, at the centre of this glistening shrine to suburban consumerism, stands a capacious outlet of the DIY store B&amp;Q, also home of the BBQ set.
Government regulations come into force tomorrow that will allow groups of up to six people to meet up outside, including in back gardens. After 10 long and monotonous weeks of social isolation, it's the news that, if not everybody, then certainly sausage manufacturers have been dreaming of.
"You can even have a barbecue," announced prime minister Boris Johnson last week in one of those Churchillian moments of national spirit-raising for which he would like to be renowned.That is to say, you can chuck lighter fuel on the charcoal as long as your gathering is socially distanced, everyone washes their hands and exercises what Johnson called "common sense" – a disputed concept, these days; it may mean that if you don't possess a barbecue set yourself, then you can drive 260 miles to see a family member who does have one.
Alternatively you can just go to the Friern Barnet Retail Park and pick up a barbecue set for as little as £24. With about 40 people maintaining strict 2m gaps, there was a long queue at B&amp;Q but no sign of a barbecue.
"We've come here to buy construction bits," explained translator Paula Soto, there with her partner Vijay Bakrania, who works in healthcare technology.
They weren't much interested in grilling hamburgers for up to four friends.
"I don't think the R number is low enough to take a chance," said Soto, every bit the amateur epidemiologist that we have all learned to become.
Forget the gastronomy, let's look at the virology, seemed to be the general message.
Another customer who had no plans to buy or indeed hold a barbecue was Roy Olchik. He was underwhelmed by the new rules of social engagement. On the one hand he thought the continued social distancing provisions meant that there was little opportunity for "fun as it used to be".
"If we meet other families with our children and their children, how can you keep social distance?"
And on the other, he agreed with those members of Sage, the government's scientific advisory group, who have expressed reservations about relaxing the lockdown.
"We're not out of the woods yet," he said, "so it's frightening."
This sentiment was echoed by several people in the queue. Only grandfather John Cook was excited about the new arrangement. He planned to hold a socially distanced party in his garden for his grandson's birthday on Thursday.
"It will definitely lift the spirits," he said. "We've tended to suppress our feelings a little bit. We've tried to be much more cheerful than we really are."
But his improved spirits did not extend to the idea of the Johnsonian-endorsed barbecue. Perhaps fittingly for a B&amp;Q patron, he intended instead to go DIY. "We'll have a bring-your-own-food party," he said, "which might get round some of the problems of sharing plates."
If the retail park told a story of caution and anxiety, the actual parks provided a very different picture. Heat and sunshine does something to the British,and nowhere more conspicuously than in city parks. At the first sign of a heatwave we abandon social inhibitions, along with clothes and pretty much alldefinitions, however disputed, of common sense.
As temperatures have hovered around the mid-20s in this most sublime of spring seasons, the parks have played host to some scenes that, in our current puritan climate, can seem positively Hogarthian. It's possible to see gatherings of 10 or more people honouring the 2m rule more in the breach than in the observance.
It has been suggested that such transgressions have multiplied in the wake of the Dominic Cummings revelations, as people no longer see the point in adhering to rules they believe have been flouted by the prime minister's senior advisor.
JJ, Mustafa and Jasmine, a trio I met in Queen's Park in north-west London, dismissed the idea that the Cummings saga had changed anyone's behaviour.
"I live by Highbury Fields," said JJ, who works in the music business, "and I've never seen it as busy as in last few weeks, and that was pre-Cummings. I think he's a shaft but I also think the level of hysteria has been insane."
It was the first time the three friends had met up since before the lockdown, and Mustafa, who is a doctor, was looking forward to the possibilities offered by the new rules. "It's going to be amazing," he said with genuine enthusiasm, as though standing 2m away from five friends was an almost unimaginable level of social engagement.
"We are social animals. To see someone in the flesh, in 3D, makes a huge difference," said JJ, sounding like the weary veteran of rather too many Zoom encounters.
"I don't even like these two," he went on, jokingly nodding towards the others, "but I'm actually excited to see them today."
Throughout the Covid-19 crisis the government has tended to be one or two steps behind the public mood. A lot of people imposed their own lockdownbefore the official one came into play. And they started to meet up in parks and gardens with friends and family before the new provisions were announced.
Yet while the wide berth that almost everyone once gave each other on the street has steadily narrowed, it's striking how many still stick to the ground rules. If the smell of charred grills is going to become more familiar in gardens across the land, the signs are that the current social distancing policy won't go entirely up in smoke.
