Stonehenge with no crowds? Big changes planned for reopening
From one-way systems to alfresco shops, English Heritage sites will be very different when they begin to reopen in July
Nature has reclaimed Stonehenge, English Heritage has revealed, with a family of hares nesting and deer nibbling the grass around the standing stones.
The world heritage site, which drew 1.5 million visitors last year, was closed to the public in mid-March along with the charity's other ticketed locations. Its new occupants moved in some weeks later. "In some ways it is rather nice to remember that it does sit within a landscape," says Kate Mavor, the chief executive of English Heritage.
Whether or not the hares stick around until Stonehenge reopens to the public, which she hopes will happen in early July, people should expect a markedly different experience, much of which will become the "new normal" for visits to historic sites, she says.
Visitors will be directed via one-way systems, cafes will be shut in favour of outdoor catering stalls and gift shops may be replaced by trestle tables selling items in the open air, Mavor says. Some larger shops may operate as normal, but in many "it's not like John Lewis where you have a big open space". Sightseeing on a whim may also be a thing of the past, with guests to be required to pre-book tickets with a specific time slot. "People have been doing that at the Harry Potter Experience for years. We are now having to do that for different reasons," she says.
Toilets have also been meticulously considered at the 50 less enclosed sites English Heritage hopes to open as part of a first wave, which will include Tintagel, Hadrian's Wall and Barnard Castle. Mavor has been talking to ministers and other heritage sector leaders about how to manage physical distancing at basins and urinals. "It's all been very, very carefully thought through," she says.
After scanning aerial images of all of its 420 sites, spanning periods from prehistory to the cold war, small teams have been visiting each one, "putting in the hand sanitisers, working out where there is an area where you can't be 2 metres apart, what the cleaning regime would be on the handles of the doors". New signs will warn of narrow corridors in castles. "These are the minutiae that people are looking at," Mavor says.
What is good news for the wildlife of Salisbury plain, however, has been a disaster for museums and heritage organisations, and English Heritage is no exception. The enforced closures caused by the coronavirus pandemic have wiped up to £70m from the charity's projected income this year, almost 60% of last year's total.
That has meant cancelling millions of pounds worth of maintenance, "which we know is going to store up bigger bills later on, as with any repairs that you don't do", Mavor says.
The bigger concern may be next year when, even if lockdown restrictions have eased, international tourism is not expected to have bounced back, depriving the charity of a huge source of gift shop revenue. That will certainly mean an appeal to the government for crisis funds, she says, and is likely to mean the organisation's transition to full financial self-sufficiency is pushed back from its 2023 target.
With more than a million paying members, however, English Heritage is in a much stronger position than many others. "A lot of [individual museums and sites] just don't have that kind of support, and they still have to pay their bills. Once the furlough runs out that is really critical for them," Mavor says.
Does the organisation anticipate potentially taking on sites that can no longer function individually? "We are willing to talk to everyone, because what we care about is that these places are kept secure and are there for future generations to enjoy."
Before it can open, Stonehenge will, as it has for 5,000 years, be the focus of the summer solstice on 20 June. With the site deserted for the first time in years, English Heritage will be livestreaming the event.
"So the incursion of nature will probably be visible on the live stream, which is rather nice," says Mavor. And if the hares are still there in July? "It depends how shy they are. Maybe they will sit there and look out at us all, or maybe they will hop it."