Daniel Andrews says Jenny Mikakos's decision to quit is 'appropriate'
Victoria's health minister resigns a day after the premier said she was partially to blame for the bungled Covid hotel quarantine scheme
The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, says Jenny Mikakos's decision to quit as the state's health minister was "appropriate", but refused to elaborate on why he believed it was the correct decision.
On Saturday Mikakos announced she would resign as health minister and quit parliament, a day after the premier said she was partially to blame for the state's bungled Covid-19 hotel quarantine scheme.
In a scathing statement issued on Twitter, Mikakos said she "strongly disagree[d]" with comments made by Andrews during an inquiry into the state's hotel quarantine scheme, but felt she had no choice but to resign.
"I have never wanted to leave a job unfinished but in light of the premier's statement to the board of inquiry and the fact that there are elements in it that I strongly disagree with, I believe that I cannot continue to serve in his cabinet," she wrote in a one-page statement.
"I am disappointed that my integrity has sought to be undermined."
Addressing the media on Saturday afternoon, Andrews announced Martin Foley, the mental health, creative industries and equality minister, would replace Mikakos. He thanked Mikakos for her "dedicated service", but said that while he had not asked for her resignation it was "the appropriate course of action for her to take".
"I believe Jenny's made the right choice, but she made that choice," he said.
"I have not spoken to the minister before she resigned. She sent me a text. It was simply to inform me of the fact that a letter [of resignation] had been sent. I did not speak to her and I have not spoken to her since."
But Andrews refused to answer questions about why he believed it was appropriate for the state's health minister to resign, saying he would wait until the findings of the hotel quarantine inquiry were handed down before commenting.
"My judgment on this matter doesn't change the outcome," he said.
"Whether I thought it appropriate or not, she resigned. She resigned this morning, and I believe that is the appropriate course of action."
Mikakos's resignation is the first major scalp in the Victorian government following the state's second-wave Covid-19 outbreak, and comes just a day after Andrews pointed blame at the minister for her role in the bungled scheme.
Appearing before the inquiry on Friday, Andrews threw doubt on Mikakos's previous evidence that she only learned of private security in May. Instead, the premier said he "regarded her accountable" for the program from April.
"The CCC (crisis council of cabinet) was provided with regular reports by minister Mikakos containing data relevant to Victoria's response to the public health emergency," he said.
But in her statement Mikakos said she had "looked forward" to learning who had been responsible for the program for months, and had been "shocked" after receiving a genomic sequencing report in June that confirmed the link between the hotel quarantine program and Victoria's second wave.
"To say that I was shocked would be a massive understatement," Mikakos said. "As I said to the board of inquiry, I take responsibility for my department, the buck stops with me."
On Saturday, Andrews was asked about the difference in interpretation, and was pressed on why he didn't identify that he believed Mikakos was responsible for the program when asked prior to giving evidence at the inquiry.
"She's the one referring to differences and her statement is her statement," Andrews said. "She made comment. I'm not in a position to speculate on what she's referring to."
In her statement, Mikakos conceded that with the benefit of hindsight there were matters her department should have briefed her on.
"I have never shirked my responsibility for my department but it is not my responsibility alone," she said.
"I am deeply sorry for the situation Victorians find themselves in. In good conscience, I do not believe that my actions led to them."
A number of Victorian Labor MPs expressed support for Mikakos following her resignation, including Nick Staikos, the MP for Bentleigh and a parliamentary secretary to the treasurer, who said he was saddened the minister's career "has ended this way".
"She is a person of integrity who has worked her guts out while carrying the extraordinary weight of an unprecedented health crisis on her shoulders. I wish her only the best post-politics," he wrote.
The Oakleigh MP, Steve Dimopoulos, said Mikakos had been "an amazing servant for our community".
"For 21 years in parliament but long before, Jenny has been an amazing servant for our community," he wrote on Twitter.
"Few people have worked as hard or have more passion for helping others. I've never seen a hint of personal ambition, just an ambition to do good. Proud to call you a friend, Jenny."
Following the release of her statement on Saturday the New South Wales health minister, Brad Hazzard, issued a statement on Twitter saying he was "sorry" to see her resign, saying she had "worked tirelessly in this pandemic".
Hazzard also questioned Andrews' evidence to the inquiry, saying it "lacks logic".
"Premier Andrews' assertion that the health minister was responsible for the quarantine system lacks logic," he said. "How could a health minister direct police to be involved?"
But the Victorian Health Workers Union welcomed her resignation.
"We hope to engage with a new health minister to put a stop to the bizarre decisions to contract out public hospital cleaners and other non-clinical workers during a pandemic and replace them from dodgy outsourcing firms," the union said.
Victoria's second wave has resulted in more than 780 deaths and prompted weeks of strict lockdown measures for Melbourne.
Mikakos's comments follow her appearance at the hotel quarantine inquiry on Thursday, when she said she was "very disappointed" problems identified with the program early on were not raised with her.
Mikakos said she did not know the public health commander, Finn Romanes, had written to Department of Health and Human Services secretary, Kym Peake, on 9 April, warning of a "risk to the health and safety of detainees" due to governance issues.
The letter was backed by the chief health officer, Brett Sutton, and his deputy, Annaliese van Diemen.
Peake also failed to brief Mikakos on two Safer Care Victoria reports, which identified problems with the hotel quarantine program.
Mikakos also intends to resign from parliament.