Victoria may be able to pursue security company for cost of hotel quarantine failures
Contract signed with Unified Security under microscope as inquiry looks at causes of hotel quarantine fiasco
The Victorian government could be indemnified against legal action relating to failures in the hotel quarantine program and may be able to pursue a security company for costs incurred in scrapping the scheme.
The $30.2m services agreement signed between the Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions and Unified in April states that the government can recoup any costs associated with having to complete services not properly provided by the company, or "any other loss incurred".
Unified was contracted to provide more guards to more hotels than any other security company employed by the government, despite it not being on its preferred services panel.
Victoria's second wave of coronavirus cases has been traced back to the Rydges hotel in Carlton, which Unified had been contracted to service, and the Stamford Plaza, which was guarded by MSS Security.
The first case recorded in someone other than a guest at Rydges was a hotel employee, not a security guard, on 26 May.
The state government would not comment on whether it planned to pursue legal action against Unified, or how much had been spent since the program was scrapped.
Senior departmental figures contacted by Guardian Australia who were directly involved in negotiating with Unified did not return calls.
The government has continued to pay multimillion dollar contracts for unused hotel rooms, and was forced to recruit a new workforce of guards who are being paid as much as $2,000 a week despite international arrivals being diverted from Victoria since early July.
"An inquiry has been established at arm's length from government to examine issues relating to hotel quarantine," a government spokesman said.
"We will let the inquiry do its work – our focus remains on containing this virus."
The inquiry into failures in Victoria's hotel quarantine program has heard Unified was paid $44m by the government for providing almost 1,800 guards at 13 hotels.
The security company has repeatedly stated that it is not at fault, as infection control was the responsibility of the Department of Health and Human Services.
But the agreement makes clear that supply of personal protective equipment and provision of training – both of which, health experts say, are vital in maintaining adequate infection control – was the responsibility of the company.
The agreement also states that the company can only incur a debt from the department in relation to any losses if the company is found to have breached the contract.
Neither the government nor Unified would comment about whether the company had been found to have breached the agreement.
In evidence before the inquiry on Tuesday, however, the department secretary, Simon Phemister, said he did not believe that Unified had sought approval for subcontractors prior to engaging them, as was required under the agreement.
A spokesman for Unified disputed this in a statement released to Guardian Australia on Wednesday.
"The department made it clear in the procurement process that subcontracting was permitted," the spokesman said.
"The department was fully aware, at both the executive level and on the ground at the hotels, of the use of subcontractors throughout the delivery of the services.
"The nature of the hotel quarantine job, where a large number of people were needed on multiple sites at very short notice, required the use of subcontractors in order to fulfil the demand."
He declined to comment on whether Unified was still owed money by the government.
The agreement could be central to several legal cases involving the state government and Unified.
The state government is being pursued for costs relating to its handling of the pandemic in two separate cases, and Unified and MSS Security are being sued as part of a class action on behalf of those whose family members died of coronavirus contracted in the second wave.
Inquiry hearings before former judge Jennifer Coate continue on Thursday, with the key question of who came up with the idea to use private security guards in hotel quarantine yet to be resolved. Premier Daniel Andrews is set to give evidence on Friday afternoon.