Melbourne's Harley Bennell sent home from AFL hub after breach of Covid-19 protocols
Demons player suspended for four games and club fined $50,000 after 27-year-old left hub on Sunshine Coast to visit another residence
Melbourne's Harley Bennell has been suspended for four games by the AFL for a breach of the league's Covid-19 protocols.
Bennell was sanctioned after leaving the Demons' hub on the Sunshine Coast and attempting to visit another residence without approval, and visiting an unapproved premises.
Bennell was immediately placed in isolation once the club became aware of the potential breach, and he will now be sent home from the Twin Waters resort, which is also shared by the NRL's Melbourne Storm.
He will serve the suspension across the first four weeks of the 2021 AFL season.
The Demons were fined $50,000 for the breach, none of which is suspended due to a breach earlier in the year by two Melbourne players. $50,000 will be included in their 2021 soft cap.
"Harley knew the rules and could have put his club and the competition at risk on the eve of a finals campaign." AFL general counsel Andrew Dillon said.
Bennell's breach comes weeks after Richmond pair Callum Coleman-Jones and Sydney Stack were sent home and suspended for 10 weeks by the AFL after visiting a Gold Coast strip club and then getting involved a drunken brawl.
"This is a selfish act by Harley, and a clear breach of the AFL's protocols," Melbourne chief executive Gary Pert said.
"He has made a very poor decision, which is incredibly disappointing. He has not only put himself, his teammates and the competition at risk, but he has failed to live up to the values of the Melbourne Football Club.
"On behalf of the Melbourne Football Club, I sincerely apologise to the AFL and the Queensland government for the embarrassment and harm that this incident has caused.
"Harley knew the rules. He understands the extent of his actions and is incredibly remorseful for his behaviour. He has made a terrible mistake and has been punished accordingly."
Bennell played five matches for Melbourne this year and was not part of the travelling squad that beat Essendon at Metricon Stadium on Saturday.