Victoria's former police chief denies pushing use of private guards for hotel quarantine
Text messages presented to inquiry show Graham Ashton believed private security guards were part of a deal made by the premier's department
Victoria's former police commissioner has denied recommending the use of private security guards for the state's problematic hotel quarantine program, with text messages revealing he believed it was part of a deal made by the premier's department.
The former commissioner, Graham Ashton, was asked by the inquiry on Friday about two 27 March meetings where it's alleged he stated a preference for private guards.
"Absolutely untrue," Ashton replied, under questioning from Richard Attiwill QC, acting for the Department of Premier and Cabinet.
Three crucial meetings are said to have taken place on 27 March – one involving Ashton, police minister Lisa Neville and emergency management commissioner Andrew Crisp. There was a second interagency meeting, which Ashton attended, and a third state control centre meeting where the Department of Jobs, Precincts, and Regions was tasked with recruiting private security guards.
In his written submission, Ashton said he asked Crisp on 27 March whether Victoria police would be used to guard the hotels, to which he recalls Crisp responding "no".
But Attiwill challenged Ashton's memory of the meeting, pointing out that in his oral evidence, Ashton said he asked whether private security would be used.
Ashton denied that assertion, stating that Crisp raised the potential use of private security guards in that meeting before he did.
The inquiry has previously heard that it was in the state control centre meeting where the use of private security firms was decided.
However, evidence released to the inquiry on Thursday indicated the decision may have been made prior to the 27 March meetings.
Text messages exchanged between Ashton and Australian federal police commissioner Reece Kershaw (on the same day, but before the meeting and the prime minister's announcement of hotel quarantine) released to the inquiry revealed Ashton initially believed it was the role of the AFP to secure the hotels.
"Mate. Question. Why wouldn't AFP guard people At The Hotel?" Ashton said to Kershaw, before texting again: "Mate. My advise [sic] is ADF will do passenger transfer and private security will be used."
"Ok that's new," Kershaw replied.
"I think that's the deal set up by our DPC [Department of Premier and Cabinet]," Ashton replied.
Ashton could not recall how he heard DPC had made a deal. Inquiry chair Jennifer Coate indicated it would likely come up in evidence next week when witnesses, who will include premier Daniel Andrews, will give evidence.
Ashton stressed it was not his decision to use private security guards in hotels, but said he was "comfortable" with the decision at the time.
"I understood that private security would be operating at the hotel so that people couldn't just come in and go as they liked and that if there was any problem, we would be very, very close by, having it in the CBD and that we could provide support as required," he said.
"That seemed to be a very sensible plan."
Evidence given to the inquiry from the current police commissioner, Shane Patton, also revealed Victoria police was aware as early as 28 March that Australian defence force personnel would be on offer to assist with guarding hotels.
In a note following a conference call with Ashton and the other deputy commissioners at the time, Patton noted "ADF available re static guarding" of hotels. Patton was unable to recall details about the call and whether ADF, security guards or Victoria police were discussed in regards to guarding hotels.
The note contradicts claims from Andrews that ADF support was not on offer, following evidence provided from the federal government to the inquiry of an email showing the contrary.
Patton also told the inquiry there was never any request made to Victoria police for 24/7 security to be provided to the hotels, and if such a request was made it would have been "explored". Victoria police has now taken up such a role in the Covid-positive hotels being used for people who cannot isolate in their home.
Earlier in Thursday's hearing, the state emergency controllers overseeing Victoria's Covid-19 response, Andrea Spiteri and Jason Helps, said it was their personal view that using ADF and police only – without security guards – for hotel quarantine may not have helped avoid a second wave. Instead, they argue, their exclusive use could have intimidated and alarmed returned travellers.
The inquiry will hold at least three more hearings before closing submissions on Friday 25 September, with ministers, the premier and top departmental officials expected to give evidence.