Covid-free or high-risk environment: can gyms be safe?
The fitness industry insists there is no risk, but with gyms implicated in several clusters in NSW, others argue it's difficult to make them Covid-safe
It may have come as no surprise to many that a small cluster of Covid-19 has been traced to a New South Wales gym.
After all, the purpose of gyms is to work out – perspire, respire vigorously and often leave behind blood, sweat and tears.
But the fitness industry in Sydney – where cases have been linked to the Tattersalls gym in the CBD, Virgin Active in Zetland, Anytime Fitness in Marrickville, Planet Fitness in Casula and Fitness First facilities in Bondi, Maroubra, Randwick, Kings Cross, Bond Street, Rockdale, Balgowlah and St Leonards – insists they are safe.
"The data from across NSW showed that during an eight-week period after gyms reopened there were more than 7.31 million check-ins across 546 gyms and during that same period there were zero cases of reported community transmission in a gym," says Fitness First's general manager, David Aitchison, who is in charge of the chain's 60 gyms across the country.
Aitchison says there is no evidence that suggests gyms are a high-risk environment.
"We firmly believe gyms are a Covidsafe environment for all Australians when strict hygiene and social distancing measures are enforced."
Despite those confident words, gyms are in the spotlight as outbreaks circle the industry.
Professor Marylouise McLaws, a University of NSW professor and adviser to the World Health Organisation, says it's very hard to make gyms Covid-free.
"While people are panting and increasing their respiratory rate … it's counterintuitive to think it can be made safe," McLaws says.
To deal with this risk, NSW Health has issued a Covid-19 safety plan that indoor gyms must abide by, that includes rules around social distancing, hygiene and cleanliness.
Simon Thompson, the chief operating officer of Collective Wellness Group, which runs the Anytime Fitness gyms, rejected the idea that gyms should be closed due to the pandemic.
"There hasn't been a single transmission from our gym, and there hasn't been a single transmission from any gym."
Thompson said the lack of community transmission in actual facilities reflected well on the current safety plan.
"No one is catching it from members that are going into the gym with Covid-19. So they're a safe environment, and should be allowed to operate."
Aitchison also vehemently denied there was any danger posed by gyms at the moment.
Although the clusters that formed around the gyms in Sydney did not involve community transmission in the spaces, they did reflect the risk gyms pose. If infectious people do attend a gym, the risk is always going to be inherently higher.
Because of the airborne way the virus spreads, and because indoor gyms are closed spaces with limited airflow, there is an increased potential capacity for the virus to thrive there.
Droplets in the air and on surfaces that come from an infected person, in addition to close contact, are the main ways people are getting the virus, and the main ways gyms can be pose a risk.
And it is that infectiousness that has McLaws worried.
"Like singing or shouting, when you're at the gym, you're using a lot of effort, and so you're panting, and that pushes out particles from deep in your lungs.
"I can't see how you can make it safe with exhalation, if you're going to the gym to get fit, you increase your respiratory rate, which increases your heart rate."
McLaws is also worried about microdroplets, which are thousands of times smaller than regular infectious droplets but remain airborne for longer.
Although NSW Health said it recognised this risk, it has stuck by its current Covid-19 safety plan for gyms.
"Regular exercise is important for both physical and mental wellbeing and NSW Health is working closely with the sector to ensure every measure is taken to keep people safe when they visit the gym."
The NSW Health plan includes rules ensuring social distancing is maintained at all times, that equipment is constantly cleaned, that staff are trained and that there are limitations on the number of attendees at any one time.
The plan requires gyms to have a Covid-19 hygiene marshal present at all times, which has limited the hours a gym can be open.
Some 24-hour gyms, such as the Anytime Fitness chains, have had to limit their hours to ensure a marshal is always present.
Surprisingly though, other gyms have seen their general attendance numbers increase, as people felt the need to return to a sense of normalcy.
"A huge portion of our members returned to us, and we've had an increase in new membership sign-ups as Australians were eager to get back into the gym," Aitchison said.
But McLaws argued that to make gyms safe, regulations needed to address the issue of airflow.
"If there's not enough airflow, particles, the very small ones, can hang in the air for longer.
"If you could open up all the windows, and have a really good, natural airflow change, it could work. But you'd need 160 litres of airflow change per second, per person. Which is a lot."
She also suggested large perspex barriers, and placing further limits on the number of people allowed at the same time.
Thompson however believed that the current regulations were the best way to keep attendees safe.
"We've looked into absolutely everything, if we didn't believe it was safe, we wouldn't be telling people to come in.
"I just firmly believe that, above what we've got now, nothing else is going to make a fundamental difference."
NSW Health declined to comment on whether the current protocols needed changing, or if any further rules will be added.
McLaws lamented that gyms have been allowed to continue opening during the pandemic under what she calls lax protocols, compared with the strict rules around religious gatherings.
"We're not allowing people to go to churches, synagogues and mosques, to sing and pray, because we know that increases the amount of potential virus coming out of peoples lungs.
"And yet for some reason, the gym has been allowed, which I think is counterintuitive."