US health official laments 'politicization' of CDC after Trump and Redfield spat
Ashish Jha of Brown University said Dr Robert Redfield is 'right' about masks and that 'we've got to let the CDC scientists speak'
A prominent public health official on Thursday lamented the politicization of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) after a public spat a day earlier between Donald Trump and the CDC director, Dr Robert Redfield, a medical doctor, over masks and a Covid-19 vaccine.
The president said Redfield was "confused" about the timeline for a coronavirus vaccine and attacked Redfield over his assertion that masks are "the most important, powerful public health tool we have" to combat coronavirus.
Ashish Jha, dean of the Brown University School of Public Health, said on ABC's Good Morning America on Thursday that there was no doubt about which man was confused.
"The doctor is right" about masks, Jha said.
Jha went on to lament what he described as the "politicization" of CDC, the lead federal agency for combatting infectious diseases which prior to the Trump administration was seen as the global gold standard for data-driven public health policy.
Trump has eroded faith in the world-leading agency by ridiculing warnings it has issued about the dangers posed by Covid-19 and contradicting the agency's guidance on mask wearing, the promise of a vaccine, the importance of social distancing and other mitigation measures, the rate of spread of the virus and more.
"It's a very difficult situation," said Jha. "We've got to let the CDC scientists speak and share their scientific expertise with us."
Trump's presidential opponent, Joe Biden, has promised to listen to government scientists in crafting coronavirus response policy. Trump baselessly accuses Biden of wanting to turn over the reins of government to public health officials.
But in attacking shelter-in-place recommendations and other public health measures, not even Trump has attained the height of shrill and divisive rhetoric mooted this week in a private speech by the attorney general, William Barr, at Hillsdale College in Michigan.
In his speech, Barr compared a "national lockdown" – about which there has never been any serious discussion in the United States, unlike in other countries that have successfully used such a measure to get the virus under control – to American slavery.
"Putting a national lockdown, stay-at-home orders, it's like house arrest," Barr said. "It's – you know other than slavery, which was a different kind of restraint, this is the greatest intrusion on civil liberties in American history."
"If there was an award for understatement, 'a different kind of restraint' would win by acclamation," tweeted the BBC correspondent Anthony Zurcher.
"This is truly deranged," tweeted Jamelle Bouie, a New York Times columnist.
As election day approaches, the distance between the Trump administration and federal officials attempting to give sound public health advice has grown, even as the confirmed death toll from Covid-19 in the United States has climbed to almost 200,000.
Trump attacked Redfield for testifying for the senate that a vaccine would likely become generally available in "late second quarter, third quarter 2021". Trump has been promising a vaccine within weeks and implying it would swiftly be widely available.
"I think he made a mistake with that statement," Trump said of Redfield in a White House briefing on Wednesday evening, just hours after Redfield had testified on Capitol Hill. "When he said it, I believe he was confused. I'm just telling you we're ready to go."
Both versions of the vaccine timeline admitted the possibility of obtaining a limited number of doses later this year to be prioritized for healthcare workers and vulnerable populations. This in a context where a successful vaccine has yet to emerge from clinical trials in the US.
Fueling hopes for such a development, the chief executive of Moderna Inc told Reuters on Thursday that the company could soon seek emergency authorization for a candidate vaccine that has nearly completed the enrollment of 30,000 in the last stage of clinical trials.
Vaccines must demonstrate they are at least 50% more effective than a placebo to be considered for approval. Moderna said it would seen the emergency authorization from the Food and Drug Administration if its candidate proves to be at least 70% effective.
An independent safety board will take a first look at Moderna's data as soon as a total of 53 people in the trial become infected with Covid-19, Reuters reported.
"If the interim readout is deemed by the independent safety committee as positive with 70 or 80 or 90% efficacy, we will indeed consider approval," Stéphane Bancel, Moderna's chief executive officer, said in a telephone interview with Reuters.
"At such a level of efficacy, if we get there, we can protect a lot of lives in the people at the highest risk, and so, we will consider filing for an EUA for a very limited population," Bancel said.