Police and MPs criticise last-minute coronavirus lockdown in north of England
Muslim leaders say groups are being scapegoated as late-night announcement causes anger
Residents, Tory MPs and police have rounded on the government's handling of new lockdown rules for northern England, while Muslim leaders raised concerns that communities were being scapegoated.
On a day of confusion and anger over measures affecting 4.6 million people, police federations warned that new laws barring visitors from private homes or gardens on the eve of Eid may be impossible to enforce.
Some MPs expressed anger at the measures in areas with low coronavirus cases, and there was criticism of the announcement being made on Twitter at 9.16pm on Thursday, less than three hours before the rules were imposed.
Boris Johnson refused to condemn a fellow Tory MP for saying that Muslims were "just not taking the pandemic seriously".
Craig Whittaker, the MP for Calder Valley in West Yorkshire, said: "If you look at the areas where we have seen rises, and cases, the vast majority – not by any stretch of the imagination all areas – it is the BME communities that are not taking this seriously enough." His comments were described as "disgraceful" by the shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, who called on the party to "do something about it".
The recriminations came after people in Greater Manchester, east Lancashire, West Yorkshire and Leicester were told they would not be allowed to visit friends or relatives in those areas because people were "not abiding to social distancing".
The leaders of Greater Manchester's 10 local authorities and the mayor, Andy Burnham, condemned the government's communication of the change via a tweet from Matt Hancock, the health secretary, as causing "confusion and distress for our residents".
Asked about Whittaker's comments during a Downing Street press conference on Friday, the prime minister did not distance himself from them, saying that it was "up to the whole country to get this right".
Whittaker later said he was talking specifically about the situation in his constituency, particularly in three wards in Halifax where there was a high proportion of Asian residents, or houses of multiple occupancy.
The Muslim Council of Britain described his remarks as "shameless scapegoating of minorities" and said mosques and Muslim institutions had "gone above and beyond" to ensure social distancing rules were observed.
Hancock denied the new restrictions were aimed at curtailing Eid celebrations, saying people would be able to mark the occasion while social distancing in parks or in mosques that had been made "Covid-secure".
Health officials in parts of the country, such as Blackburn with Darwen and Oldham, have previously said the majority of new cases were among Pakistani and Bangladeshi communities – but not because they were flouting lockdown rules. Instead, they were said to be more likely to work in an at-risk occupation and live in densely-population conditions, where the virus can spread rapidly.
Sir Richard Leese, the leader of Manchester city council, said young people had been "acting as if Covid-19 is over and as if they're immune to it", which he said was a "major reason" why more young people were now testing positive. He said officials had received "phenomenal cooperation" from the Muslim community and mosques.
In areas such as the mostly-affluent Trafford, in Greater Manchester, the majority of the new cases were middle-class younger people, according to its director of public health, who raised concerns that blaming one particular community risked sending the message that everyone else was immune to the disease.
Far-right activists on social media have already started to seek to exploit and create tensions across swathes of the north of England.
Imran Awan, a professor of criminology at Birmingham City University and the co-author of a report that warned in April that Muslims were being targeted using conspiracy theories claiming they are spreading coronavirus by violating lockdown, likened the controversy around the new rules to "trigger events" such as terror attacks, which lead to spikes in hate crime.
The measures drew criticism from three Tory MPs including Graham Brady, the chair of the influential backbench 1922 Committee, who represents a Greater Manchester seat and complained that the blanket ban did not take into account local factors.
Hancock insisted the rules were "absolutely crystal clear" – but officials were forced to clarify that people would not be allowed to visit other households outside the restricted zone, despite the health secretary earlier suggesting this would be allowed as long as social distancing was followed.
Burnham said the government was right to act quickly and proportionately but criticised the way the decision was communicated. He also called on the government to extend shielding arrangements for the most clinically vulnerable people in the affected areas, which are due to come to an end on Saturday [1 August].
It was not clear how the new laws would be policed. Greater Manchester police called for urgent clarity on how many people were allowed to gather in public places in the affected areas, while the chairwoman of Lancashire police federation said parts of the regulations would be "difficult, if not almost impossible" to police.
Brian Booth, the chairman of West Yorkshire police federation, said it was an "absolute nonsense" that frontline officers had with barely any notice been told to stop families celebrating Eid in private homes.
Beverley Hughes, the Greater Manchester deputy mayor, said the rules would place a "very significant demand" on resources, with chief officers expecting a "barrage of calls" from well-meaning residents reporting their neighbours to police.
Tracy Brabin, the Labour MP for Batley and Spen in West Yorkshire, said the way the new lockdown measures had been announced was "deeply chaotic" and had caused an "awful lot of anxiety" in her community.
For the Bradford councillor Tariq Hussain, the timing of the lockdown was "sacrilege" and he predicted rising tensions amongst communities. "We are in a catch-22 situation where the Covid rates are going up and we need to control it, but a lockdown on the eve of Eid when families were due to see each other is just a farce," he said.