New push to raise Covid-19 testing capacity in England to 500,000 a day
Campaign will urge more people to get tested, with a focus on asymptomatic health workers
Plans to raise Covid-19 testing capacity in England to 500,000 people a day have been signalled by the government as infections rise in Europe and ahead of a feared winter surge in cases.
More people without symptoms are to be tested; the goal is to reach 150,000 tests a day for people who may be asymptomatic, such as those working in health and social care and other jobs that involve contact with other people.
Anyone who has even mild symptoms can be tested and is urged to do so. In the latest week for which data has been published, from 16 to 22 July, 366,397 people were newly tested in hospitals, care homes and the community, and just over 4,000 were positive.
But this falls considerably short of the number of new infections in England estimated by modellers, such as the MRC Biostatistics Unit in Cambridge, which published new data on Wednesday showing there were 3,000 a day – a figure similar to that produced by the Office of National Statistics.
The deputy director, Dr Daniela De Angelis, told the Guardian it was not possible to predict whether that number would go up or down over the summer. "If the track and trace programme was to work well, we could hope to keep new infections under control. But there are too many unknowns at the moment, including whether the programme is working, the pandemic abroad, the reopening of schools, and going back to workplaces. There are too many elements that we do not know the impact of to make any realistic guess," she said.
Neither the number of infections nor of deaths is heading for zero, which is of concern to both scientists and politicians, first as people travel abroad and then as the weather worsens into autumn and winter.
The latest data from the programme shows that the numbers testing positive for coronavirus have increased for the third week in a row, from 3,800 to 3,900 to 4,100. Increased testing explains part of the rise, but infection rates in England and particularly in some cities and regions have also slightly increased.
The main focus now is on getting more people tested. "I urge everybody to get a free test as soon as you experience coronavirus symptoms and to follow the advice you're given if you are contacted by the service. If we all continue to play our part, then together we can stop the spread of this virus," said Dido Harding, the chair of NHS test and trace.
A public campaign to encourage testing is being launched on Thursday with a 60-second TV advert. Part of the new push is said to include the launch of the long-awaited contact tracing app, although there is still no date set.
Contact-tracing teams are still only reaching four out of five of those who test positive (81.4%) – a marginal increase on the 81.3% in the previous week, the NHS data shows.
More than 18,000 people were identified as coming into close contact with someone who has tested positive and been transferred to contact tracing. Of these, 13,974 people (75.1%) were reached and asked to self-isolate, a decrease from 78.4% the previous week.
"The NHS test-and-trace service is a vital part of enabling us to get back to safely doing the normal things we love, and will become ever more important as we approach winter," said Harding.
"By working in partnership with local public health and local authority teams, we are already helping stop the spread of coronavirus across England, by reaching over 200,000 people who may have been at risk of passing it on."