Coronavirus: English care homes policy 'reckless', MPs say
Report criticises 'appalling' error of discharging untested patients from hospitals
Advising hospitals to discharge thousands of patients into care homes without knowing if they had coronavirus was a "reckless" and "appalling" policy error, a Commons report has said.
Discharging about 25,000 patients to free beds was an example of the government's "slow, inconsistent and at times negligent" approach to social care, said the cross-party public accounts committee (PAC) said.
It said it was "concerned" that the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) had continued with the policy "even once it was clear there was an emerging problem".
Public Health England issues guidance stating that it was "very unlikely" care homes would become infected. The guidance was not withdrawn until 12 March.
Despite a lack of official statistics about fatalities, care homes warn that they are at "breaking point" and MHA, the country's biggest charitable provider, says it has suspected cases in more than half of its facilities.
The Department of Health and Social are guidelines on discharging hospital patients into care homes states: "Negative tests are not required prior to transfers/admissions into the care home."
Chief medical adviser Chris Whitty says that more than one in ten care homes (13.5%) now has at least one case of Covid-19. Whitty says: "Care homes are one of the areas where there are large numbers of vulnerable people and that is an area of risk and therefore we would very much like to have much more extensive testing."
Testing is expanded into care homes but only for people with symptoms.
Five of the largest care home providers say they have now recorded a total of at least 1,052 deaths
Care home deaths are included alongside deaths in hospitals after a sharp rise of more than 4,300 deaths over a fortnight in England and Wales. Testing is extended to staff and residents without symptoms.
Launch of a national delivery system for personal protectiveequipment to care homes is hit by a delay of up to three weeks
Academics report that more than 22,000 care home residents in England and Wales may have died as a direct or indirect result of Covid-19 – more than double the number stated in official figures.
An unpublished government study which used genome tracking to investigate outbreaks revealed that temporary care workers transmitted Covid-19 between care homes as cases surged. In evidence raising further questions about ministers' claims to have "thrown a protective ring around care homes", it emerged that agency workers – often employed on zero-hours contracts – unwittingly spread the infection as the pandemic grew, according to the study by Public Health England.
A report by care homes bosses says that thousands of people lost their lives "prematurely" because care homes in England lacked the protective equipment and financial resources to cope with the coronavirus outbreak.
Care leaders, unions and MPs round on prime minister Boris Johnson after he accuses care homes of failing to follow proper procedures amid the coronavirus crisis, saying the prime minister appeared to be shifting the blame for the high death toll.
The committee chair, Meg Hillier MP, said: "The failure to provide adequate PPE or testing to the millions of staff and volunteers who risked their lives to help us through the first peak of the crisis is a sad, low moment in our national response. Our care homes were effectively thrown to the wolves, and the virus has ravaged some of them.
"The deaths of people in care homes devastated many, many families. They and we don't have time for promises and slogans, or exercises in blame. We weren't prepared for the first wave. Putting all else aside, government must use the narrow window we have now to plan for a second wave. Lives depend upon getting our response right."
Hospitals in England were asked on 17 March to discharge patients, but patients did not require a coronavirus test before discharge until 15 April.
And it was the end of April when the government said all care home residents and staff, regardless of symptoms, would be able to access tests.
This is despite Public Health England (PHE) telling the committee it was aware of asymptomatic transmission as early as the end of March.
In evidence on 22 June, Prof Paul Johnstone of PHE said: "What was becoming clear in the back-end of March and certainly from the beginning of April was that there was an asymptomatic phase, which means that people can transfer the virus without ever having symptoms, or a significant pre-symptomatic phase, which is where the virus could be shared."
The DHSC told the committee in the same session it believed the clearest correlations between social care outbreaks related to staff rather than the discharge of hospital patients. However, it added: "That is not the same as saying that we would do the same again."
The PAC said nobody would expect the government to get everything right in its initial response, but that it "urgently needs to reflect, acknowledge its mistakes, and learn from them".
Testing, it said, should have been made available to hospital patients and social care staff "much more quickly".
And it identified a lack of transparency around the availability of personal protective equipment (PPE), with a tendency for the government to "overpromise and underdeliver".
The report, Readying the NHS and Social Care for the Covid-19 Peak, is the PAC's first examination of the health and social care response to the crisis.
It also said it was concerned about a "scarcity of information on contracts and costs" during the period, when NHS England and NHS Improvement said hundreds of thousands of patient treatments had been secured through independent hospitals. The committee said it was concerned that NHS England and NHS Improvement had not provided a rough estimate of costs.
And it said allowing the Nightingale hospitals to remain empty while the NHS required additional capacity for routine services "will not be a good use of public money".
It called for the DHSC and NHS to write to the committee by 1 September detailing how private and Nightingale hospitals will be "made best use of" in the coming months.
A DHSC spokesman said: "Throughout this unprecedented global pandemic we have been working closely with the sector and public health experts to put in place guidance and support for adult social care.
"Alongside an extra £1.3bn to support the hospital discharge process, we have provided 172m items of PPE to the social care sector since the start of the pandemic and are testing all residents and staff, including repeat testing for staff and residents in care homes for over-65 or those with dementia.
"We know there is a need for a long-term solution for social care and we will bring forward a plan that puts social care on a sustainable footing to ensure the reforms will last long into the future."