UK food tsar Henry Dimbleby: 'I have a bugbear about Percy Pigs'
Co-founder of Leon thinks so-called 'natural' sweets are misleading over sugar content
Henry Dimbleby, a co-founder of the restaurant chain Leon, was appointed by the government to lead a landmark review of Britain's food system to determine a national strategy. Here are some highlights of a Q&amp;A with Dimbleby ahead of the publication of the first part of that report.
Marks &amp; Spencer's Percy PigsI have had a bugbear about Percy Pigs for a while. Percy Pigs are a sweet that is marketed on the front with all-natural fruit juice and it's right by your kids' little fingers. And on the back, if you understand calorie labelling, the first four ingredients are forms of sugar. I just think that is not right. I think that is genuinely misleading. The reason I pick M&amp;S is because they have integrity as one of their values, but it is rampant in the food world: Low-fat which is actually high in sugar. "Free from" this, that and the other.Yes CEOs have to respond to commercial pressures, but they are not unable to take any value-based decisions.
Should sweets have plain packaging?No. I think we would get a massive backlash. I went to a party the other day where all of the children were just given carrot batons. There wasn't any cake or any sweets, and in those little children's eyes I saw a joyless future. There's something about plain packaging on sweets that for me would feel like too much government intervention.
On 'healthy' fruit snacksSome of those - not all of those - are the kind of thing that are being clothed in a veneer of goodness and actually may be no better for you than a Mars bar. Not all of them. It depends what the level of fibre is and the level of sugar.
On the sugar taxWhat's fascinating about the sugar tax is it led to reformulation not [an] increase in price. It took 45,000 tons of sugar out of our diet in a year. I think there are ways in which you might be able to use taxes to help reformulation of our food without putting the price of food up.
On his weightI wouldn't recommend any diets that I have used. My weight oscillates between the high end of healthy weight and the low end of obese, and it is a conscious struggle. Basically, we have been putting on weight since the 50s so our will power hasn't had a sudden collapse, we've just gradually put on weight consistently since the 50s, and I think it's for us to lose weight but the government can make it much easier. We have a tendency to want to eat foods that are high in fat and sugar and those foods are everywhere and marketed at us.
Does he have diet advice for Boris Johnson?I met him when I was doing the school food plan a while ago [it was published in 2013] and he told me then he was on 'project whippet', which was his attempt to lose weight at that point. I'm not sure what he's calling this attempt but I wouldn't want to give the PM particular advice on his diet. I'm sure he's got people far more qualified than me to do that."
What has Covid-19 taught us about the food supply chain?The biggest weakness it has exposed is the wake-up call on health. 1.6m years of life are lost every year to ill health and death from diet-related diseases. It is just bleak that this form of life-giving sustenance is now killing us.
Should The Great British Bake Off be banned?No. I love baking and I love Bake Off.