Unions call for face masks to be provided for free to all workers
Unite, GMB and Community say employers should pay if staff need to wear masks at work
Surgical-grade face masks must be provided for all workers who need to wear them including those on the daily commute, unions have said, as the government encourages people to go back to work in person from 1 August.
Unite, the GMB and Community have all said that where masks are believed to be helpful at work, they should be provided employers and workers should not have to foot the bill themselves.
There has been criticism that the guidance on masks or face coverings from the government is too vague, and only those with three-layers endorsed by the World Health Organization should be worn to have any serious effect against the transmission of coronavirus.
Unite said the government should consider contributing towards the cost, in line with the French government, if businesses are struggling to provide them.
They estimate that it could cost workers using public transport to and from work an extra £25 a month on disposable masks. This would rise again if they need to wear one during their shift at work.
Cloth masks would be cheaper but must be washed after each use.
"The government should provide proper masks and finance it. If this can be done in other countries successfully it should be done here," said Rob Migeul, Unite's health and safety adviser.
The surgical-grade three-layer mask should have a waterproof outer layer, Unite said, inline with the WHO guidelines.
"If you're going to say use face masks, there must be a standard for them," he said.
Community union is also calling on bosses to pay for masks for workers and ensure that they are handed out to those commuting on pubic transport.
Head of research, policy and external relations at Community, Kate Dearden, said: "If employers need their workforce to re-enter the workplace then they need to be providing them with the necessary PPE for all activities related to their work.
"We are increasingly concerned that those returning to work will have to fork out for the PPE they need to keep themselves and others safe while travelling to and from their workplace.
"Good employers will already be providing this PPE, or preparing to provide it when their workforce return, but government should go further and require employers to provide it."
The government has said it is keen to see workers return to town and city centres in person from 1 August if it is safe to do so, in a bid to revive high streets that typically rely on a heavy footfall of people.
A spokesperson for the GMB said: "Most people have no idea about face-mask standards. They should be the WHO backed ones, of three layers.
"It is the responsibility of the employer to provide the mask. Something that explains what employers are meant to do would be beneficial when it comes to protective equipment."
The government has said that employers must carry out a risk assessment for their business to address the risks of Covid-19 and there is a hierarchy of measures, including social distancing, high standards of hand hygiene, increased surface cleaning and using screens to separate people from each other.
They have said a face covering could be "marginally beneficial and a precautionary measure" in some settings.
They do not specify surgical grade masks however there are guidelines compiled by the Office for Product and Safety Standards for manufacturers which include advice such as the coverings should not be made of material that sheds fibres that may be inhaled during use.