Police in England and Wales 'twice as likely' to fine young BAME men during lockdown
Analysis of fixed-penalty notices found group as a whole were 1.6 times more likely to be fined than white people
Police were twice as likely to fine young black and Asian men under the lockdown rules than their white counterparts, according to new figures that underline concerns about racial bias in policing.
Analysis of fixed-penalty notices issued under the coronavirus regulations by National Police Chiefs' Council (NPCC) found that black, Asian and minority ethnic people (BAME) were 1.6 times more likely to be fined than white people.
But for young black and Asian men the difference was even more pronounced. Young men aged between 18 and 34 from BAME groups were over-represented by around twice the rate of young white men, the study found.
The NPCC found 17,039 fines were issued between 27 March and 25 May, which represents only three fines per 10,000 people. But the rate for black people was 4.6 per 10,000 and for Asian people it was 4.7.
NPCC chair, Martin Hewitt, admitted that the figures raised alarms and that individual forces should consider how they tackle racial bias.
He said: "While it is a complex picture, it is a concern to see disparity between white and black, Asian or ethnic minority people. Each force will be looking at this carefully to assess and mitigate any risk of bias – conscious or unconscious – and to minimise disproportionate impact wherever possible."
He said the analysis would inform an NPCC action plan on inclusion and race equality in policing.
"After the killing of George Floyd, there has been a real look internally at the progress that we have made in terms of policing relationships with the black community and the inclusivity of policing. We have done a lot, but we haven't done enough and it hasn't gone fast enough. We are in the process of working through what will be a significant new plan of action in terms of how we deal with issues of inclusivity within the service. The findings of this analysis will be further considered as part of that work."
But Hewitt urged caution over interpreting local racial disparity in the figures because so few cases were involved. He admitted in the mainly rural Cumbria force, BAME people were 6.8 times more likely to be fined than white people, as the Guardian revealed last week.
But he pointed out that in half the forces of England and Wales, including Cumbria, fewer than 40 than fines were issued to BAME people.
Hewitt said: "It hard to draw striking conclusions form such small numbers."
He added: "For a number of forces, continued focus on crime and violence could affect their disparity rate as areas of that have been a focus of police activity are also areas with a higher concentration of black, Asian and minority ethnic people, which also increases the possibility of officers identifying and dealing with breaches during those deployments.
"In communities or groups with lower trust in police, attempts to encourage before enforcing may be less successful."
The figures come as the police across England and Wales face an inquiry by the Independent Office for Police Conduct to establish whether they racially discriminate against ethnic minorities in their use of force and stop and search.
Several key indicators show police powers in England and Wales are used disproportionately against BAME communities. Stop and search is nine times more likely to be used against black people, and Taser stun gun use almost eight times more likely.
Katrina Ffrench, chief executive of the charity StopWatch, which campaigns for fair and accountable policing, said: "It is saddening to know that even in a global pandemic young black males are subjected to such over-policing and viewed with so much suspicion."