'Happy 100th, Mum': partying through a care home window
As families were finally allowed to visit care homes, one son drove 350 miles, camping in a car park, for his mother's birthday
On Wednesday, the government released guidance for visiting elderly relatives in care homes. Thanks, Matt Hancock, bit of a shame about the timing though, as my care home-dwelling mum had turned 100 just a few days before. But this is not a tale of embittered, enforced absence. We'd got on top of this months ago when we started planning my birthday visit. And I spent the day, using some carefully thought-out restrictions, with my mother – who was born in the summer of 1920 just months after the last cases were diagnosed from the flu pandemic that had broken out in 1918.
Mum has lived in a care home in a village in the far north of England since last summer, after 14 years in sheltered accommodation in Scotland. Widowed in her early 50s, until she was 85 she had lived on her own in a cottage in a nearby village, setting a coal fire with kindling nearly every morning, much as I had watched her do as a child. I was a later-life, unexpected baby and my surviving siblings are much older than me. One is estranged from the family and the other is too ill to travel. Grandchildren are scattered around the country and the world, themselves locked down, and with their own children to care for. So there was only ever one person who was going to be there.
But in the middle of a pandemic, with often misleading, contradictory advice from our flailing national government, how do you visit a care home 350 miles away, let alone find somewhere to stay? My research started not long after lockdown kicked in but didn't look promising. Local Airbnb rentals weren't available and the hotels and regular bnbs were closed. Travel was restricted, and even in the weeks leading up to the trip, train timetables were provisional and seats unavailable when I had to travel. The only answer was accommodation on wheels. The website and app Camplify is like Airbnb for campervans, so a few days before the anniversary I collected a neatly converted Japanese people-carrier from an east London address and headed north. I had permission from the home to set up camp in the staff car park.
Apart from one day a week at the Observer office, I'd hardly left my small patch of south London for nearly four months. What was it like out there? Were people being sensible or reckless? At a service station on the M11, no one but me and the assistant in WH Smith wore face masks. We raised out eyebrows in sync as a couple, faces uncovered, strode breezily right up to the counter, seemingly oblivious to the peeling distancing stickers on the floor. The van was a much safer place to be.
Arriving at about seven the night before the celebrations, my temperature was checked and I was declared symptom-free. Her home has had no cases of Covid-19 among staff or residents, and they are not taking any chances. She was delivered to the front door by wheelchair and we spoke at the regulation 6ft apart until she grew tired. Then, as no pubs were open in the village, it was back to the van to binge-watch TV on the laptop.
The next day, we could speak through her bedroom window, which backs on to a pretty, self-contained garden. She hadn't wanted a fuss, she'd said months before, but didn't seem to mind too much that her room was festooned with balloons and cards, including one from the Queen, organised (you have to order it, it doesn't just arrive) by my sister. We held hands through the window when the care assistants weren't looking, with sanitiser liberally applied afterwards. That morning she had had a congratulatory phone call, arranged by a friend, from the Lord Provost of Edinburgh, her home town. Later, in the gardens at the front of the home, a local singer gave a recital of songs from musicals, care assistants and nurses snapped us on phones like a row of paparazzi, and a heavily sculpted cake was shared around. Mum said, "This may be the last time I see you." I said I'd be back soon. But she might have been right.
Comparisons with wartime can be fatuous, but as a young mother herself, my mum had watched the sugar warehouses burning during the Clydebank blitz while my dad was in the RAF. Driving for hundreds of miles and sleeping in a car park was the least I could do. Happy birthday, Mum. Life goes on.