Third of youth clubs in London fear closure by end of year
Childcare difficulties in London mount as coronavirus hits their finances and school holidays start
Almost a third of youth clubs in London warn that they face closure amid growing concerns that the coronavirus pandemic will provoke a summer childcare crisis.
Organisations across the capital say that are preparing for their most difficult summer in decades. New data from the charity London Youth found 31% could struggle to operate within six months, more than a quarter (27%) were in difficulty with running costs and 47% had furloughed staff .
Many found that they were having problems with capacity as a result of social-distancing measures put in place as a result of the pandemic. The survey found 78% were engaging with fewer young people than they were before lockdown. Those running the clubs fear that some vulnerable children who have attended them will simply never return.
In addition, some of the organisations report concerns about vulnerable children they are used to seeing, including some struggling with mental health and a "digital divide" that has seen them cut off from school and local services.
Of those responding to the survey, 47% said less than half of their young people had everything they needed to cope properly during lockdown, such as computers, appropriate spaces and sufficient phone data or wifi. Almost three quarters (73%) said that the mental health of their young people had been affected.
Rosemary Watt-Wyness, chief executive of London Youth, said: "As we move into the summer holidays, and young people lose the support networks provided by schools, we must not leave young people to fend for themselves on issues as diverse as mental health, unemployment, racial injustice and violence. We know there will be a greater reliance on youth clubs during the school holiday period, and the absence of any youth sector-specific operating guidance from government carries a risk for youth workers and young people.
"With so many youth organisations reporting uncertainty as to whether they can financially survive beyond this year, there is a real risk they will go under at a time when our young people need them more than ever. Government must do all it can to prevent this from happening."
While youth clubs play a role in reaching out to vulnerable children, any withdrawal of services will add to concerns of a summer holiday childcare crisis. Many summer camps are not running as intended.
A survey by the Pregnant Then Screwed campaign group also found that in the last four months, 67% of female key workers were forced to reduce their hours because of a lack of access to childcare, 60% struggled with childcare provision, and 45% did not have the childcare in place they needed over the summer.