'We wear them to protect one another': readers share their homemade masks stories
A necessary evil, a good way to keep the kids entertained, and more comfortable than a bra
This mask is made with three layers of closely woven fabrics, with pleats at the top and bottom to help it sit nicely over my nose and minimise steaming up under my glasses. I'm a GP and, although I don't love wearing a mask, I do like the fact that it's something we do more for others than for ourselves. It's a positive expression of caring for each other. Catherine Lake, 47, Portsmouth
I made our masks (for myself, my husband and our toddler) with leftover fabric from my sewing stash. Being 8.75 months pregnant and constantly short of breath anyway, the thought of wearing a mask doesn't thrill me, but it's part of the implicit social contract, isn't it? We wear them to protect one another, as nobody wants a second wave. Bella Huang, 34
Wearing a mask is a necessary evil, but we might as well make the most of it and have some fun doing it! Eileen Rutherford
I started making masks from old shirts and pillowcases. I've sent them to family in Hackney, Leeds, California – and now friends in Wales have asked for some so I plan to make more! Wearing a mask is a statement about taking the risks of Covid-19 seriously. Angharad Thomas, 70
I have been making masks for my family and me since late March. More recently, I've started making clear masks to help those who rely on lip reading. If using a mask can help limit the spread of coronavirus, then it's worth wearing. Megan Dunne, 21
My flatmate and I made a few fabric masks back in May for friends who don't have a sewing machine. We used the fabric we already had, so they were all fun patterns. This was perhaps the least pandemic-appropriate! I didn't enjoy making them. I hadn't used a sewing machine for over a decade and found it slow and frustrating – and now it's easier to buy them! Wearing them in shops and public transport is a good idea, but if it's compulsory the government should provide them, especially for people on a low income. Katie Shields, 26
Trying to keep two kids entertained during lockdown was hard work, so when my 12-year-old daughter asked if she could do some tie-dying I immediately said yes. I bought the kit online, along with a few white T-shirts from a supermarket. My daughter and 10-year-old son had a great time and the finished results were great!
I thought the bright patterns would be great on face masks, so started experimenting with the sewing machine I had bought before the children were born but had never got round to using. I made about 20 initially, the best of which I gave away to family. After receiving a number of compliments about how they were good enough to sell, I asked my Facebook friends if any of them would like a mask in exchange for a £5 donation to a charity of their choice. Twenty more were ordered so I made £100 for charity as well! Helen Orton, 37, Warrington
I've been a maker all my life and have now made nearly 300 masks, most of them sold to raise cash for local charities. They are all made of cotton and double-lined with interfacing. I decided on ties for comfort and ease of adjustment. They are reversible and machine washable. I agree unreservedly with wearing them when in unavoidably close contact. I started making masks at the beginning of lockdown and have been wearing them ever since. It's a complete mystery to me why they have only lately become a thing. Annie Webster
I started my lockdown a week early, with an eye on what was happening in other countries who were quicker off the mark in their response to the virus. My German cousin was making masks for friends and family, and sent me a video link with instructions. When a friend sent me some elastic bands for the masks, it felt like a precious gift: the joy of small things when something seemingly ordinary suddenly becomes essential. I have given away 20 of the masks I've made to friends and family.
Since mid-March I've not left the house without a mask. It's a great deal less uncomfortable than a bra. So I've taken up the face mask and stopped wearing a bra. It has become a habit, like putting on my sunglasses or a scarf and grabbing my keys when I go out. Because very few people are wearing one, it greatly helps with social distancing; when people see me, they make space – maybe they fear I'm infected or just weird.
The mask also sets a visual sign: with so many people milling around merrily as if nothing is going on, it's a reminder that things are far from normal. Face masks should have been made mandatory on public transport, in shops and other public places a long time ago. As per usual, the government's measures are too little, too late. Solveigh Goett, 67
I love masks. They are just another way of being yourself, reflecting society, being creative, making things happen and with my husband we are creators, we make "images" I make objects, he makes images : the mask has become a game between us. It's creative medium. Laura Leeson
Using clear Perspex, band-sawn plywood and coloured Formica strips I am making a limited edition of these 'masks' to raise money for Sarcoma UK. I am an artist and have become inspired by the new objects suddenly so ubiquitous on our streets. Richard Wood, London
I like wearing my masks. Sewing is one of my hobbies and it's been nice to have a useful activity to engage in during lockdown. They're comfortable, wash and iron really quickly and easily, and are environmentally friendly – which matters as I suspect that masks, like the virus, will be with us for quite a long while. Wearing them is a considerate gesture to others, quite apart from making me feel I have a little bit of protection for myself. As time goes on, I suspect people will acclimatise to them and eventually we'll look back and wonder why there was ever any fuss. Susan Nicoll, 61
A friend gave me the material a few years ago and I have been waiting to have something special made. My mum made it and I have been wearing it while shopping since mid-April. This is one way we can help look after each other. The risks of passing on the virus when we might not know we have it make wearing a mask the responsible thing to do. Jacqueline Harmer, 48
Wearing a mask is something that should have been implemented from the start. You see countries in Asia and everyone seems at ease with wearing a mask. Over here the same folk who normally won't shut up about the 'Dunkirk spirit' and the sacrifices made by the war generation go to pieces when asked to wear a mask in a shop. So embarrassing. Chris Walls, 39
I've been making face coverings to raise funds for the charity Spanish Stray Dogs. They've been incredibly popular, raising much-needed funds and helping to keep people safe. Oh, and it's given me something to do during lockdown – otherwise my husband and myself would have killed each other by now! Norma Stevens, 68