Sydney Black Lives Matter protest: police say bid to stop rally unrelated to Mick Fuller comments
NSW police commissioner told 2GB BLM organisers would be taken to court, but that has 'absolutely' nothing to do with bringing the matter to court, senior officer says
The New South Wales police chief's comments that Black Lives Matter rally organisers would be taken to court had "absolutely" nothing to do with a decision to take the matter to court, a senior officer says.
A NSW supreme court hearing to determine if police can arrest or fine people at a planned Sydney Black Lives Matter rally resumed on Friday morning.
In the spotlight are comments by the NSW police commissioner, Mick Fuller, to radio station 2GB on Monday morning that a subordinate had been instructed to take the matter to the supreme court.
The acting assistant commissioner, Stacey Maloney, said she saw news reports of the comments either late Monday morning or in the afternoon.
But the comments had "absolutely" nothing to do with her decision later that day to sign off on the supreme court challenge.
"I had made up my own mind," she told the court. "The commissioner has his own view but my name has to sign off on the (court papers)."
She accepted Fuller said he had made the decision but insisted that was not part of her consideration and she received no instructions.
The 2GB comments came hours before a conference between local police and the rally organiser, Paddy Gibson.
Gibson argues Fuller's comments invalidate the police-initiated supreme court action as police legally had to take the meeting and other material into consideration.
Maloney rejected the suggestion her consideration of the material was done with "an entirely hollow basis".
"You were never going to make a decision different to the one your boss had already made?" the barrister Felicity Graham said.
"I don't agree," the officer replied.
Justice Mark Ierace rejected an application to have Fuller give evidence after hearing Maloney say on oath she had no contact with him between the interview and her decision.
"Little could be added by Commissioner Fuller," he said.
Police argue the risk to public health and safety due to Covid-19 outweighs the right to protest.
Should the supreme court rule in its favour, police would be able to move on or arrest demonstrators blocking roads and give $1,000 fines to those breaching restrictions.
Ierace asked if moving the protest from the CBD to the Domain would alleviate the police's health concerns.
"No, because people have to congregate and travel to that destination," Maloney said.
"It's the arrival and departure of that event that is still the concern to police and health."
NSW has recorded more than 230 coronavirus cases in the past three weeks, predominantly due to community transmission.
Since the start of June, NSW police have gone to the supreme court four times to seek an order prohibiting the holding of a public assembly.
The first, a major rally in Sydney, lost its "authorised" status then won a last-minute reprieve in the court of appeal on a technicality.
A Wollongong rally in mid-June was banned over the health risks while a Newcastle rally in early July was permitted after a judge ruled health risks were low.