UK's mixing of messages on coronavirus arose 'almost by accident', MPs find
'Vacuum' in ministerial communication between Westminster and Scotland meant collaboration broke down
Mixed messaging and public confusion about coronavirus policy in different parts of the UK happened "almost by accident" after groups coordinating a four-nations response stopped meeting, according to Westminster's Scottish affairs committee.
The group's interim report on intergovernmental working during the pandemic describes a "vacuum" in ministerial-level communication between the UK and Scottish governments, and details how collaboration between the nations deteriorated as lockdown measures started to be eased.
The report comes before Boris Johnson's first visit to Scotland since last November. Speaking in advance of his trip, the prime minister reiterated his commitment to the union, saying: "The last six months have shown exactly why the historic and heartfelt bond that ties the four nations of our country together is so important and the sheer might of our union has been proven once again".
It emerged on Wednesday that the prime minister had ordered senior ministers to visit north of the border more regularly and make their government more visible in the Scottish media, amid reported cabinet "panic" at growing support for independence.
The Scottish affairs committee report acknowledges there was "unprecedented coordination" between Westminster, Holyrood, Cardiff Bay and Stormont in the early stages of the pandemic, through a four-nations approach that included the UK-wide joint action plan, the Coronavirus Act and UK-wide procurement of PPE.
But the committee heard how this collaboration later fell away after key forums coordinating the Covid response – including ministerial implementation groups (Migs) and the civil contingencies committee (Cobra) – ended as lockdown measures were eased.
In evidence, Scotland's health secretary, Jeane Freeman, said that her government has last attended Cobra on 10 May, on the same day that Boris Johnson announced a change of message from "Stay at Home" to "Stay Alert", which was broadcast UK-wide without stating the changes only applied to England.
With England moving at a faster pace than other parts of the UK, the Committee concluded: "We are concerned that, as time has gone on, divergence has increased significantly, sometimes accidentally, leading to public confusion and questions about how decisions are made. The UK government has failed to make clear when its messaging applies only to England, causing unnecessary confusion in the devolved nations."
The report expresses further concerns that "devolved nations now appear to be consulted informally rather than through formalised, minuted mechanisms", and called on the UK government to outline how proposals for new coronavirus response bodies, planned for the autumn, will involve the all four nations.
Chair of the Scottish affairs committee, Scottish National party MP Pete Wishart said: "The overlapping responsibilities of policy areas operated by Westminster and Holyrood in the pandemic response make intergovernmental communication absolutely critical in effectively controlling the spread of the virus."
"But as the focus has shifted from containment to opening up the economy we are concerned that the structures that made this possible have stopped. We heard that there is a 'void' in ministerial-level communication and which appears to have occurred around the time that some divergence and confusion in messaging began to emerge. Meanwhile, the lack of clarity over what role, if any, Scottish and devolved decision-makers will play in new structures is a source of major concern."
Earlier this month, the Guardian reported Johnson had been accused of planning an "emasculation" of the devolution settlement, with senior officials and politicians warning that plans for a post-Brexit UK-wide internal market would put Scotland and Wales on a collision course with Westminster.
Earlier this month, Michael Gove was appointed by Johnson to head up a cabinet sub-committee on the union alongside Rishi Sunak, while a group of backbenchers has set up the Conservative Union Research Group (CURG) which members say is a reflection of increasing concern about the future of the UK across the party.