Michelle Mitchell: 'Cuts to UK cancer research could have a huge impact on patients'
Lifesaving new treatments are at risk due to Covid-19 income slump – unless the government steps in, warns the CRUK chief executive
The great British tradition of donning trainers to run for charity has been one of the many casualties of the pandemic, with calamitous consequences for the voluntary sector. At Cancer Research UK (CRUK), which funds 50% of all publicly funded cancer research, the cancellation of lucrative fundraising events such as its popular Race for Life series, alongside the temporary closure of its 600 shops, has made the fight to beat cancer that much harder, according to its chief executive, Michelle Mitchell.
"It is a blow to our ambition," says Mitchell, referring to the charity's aim to ensure that by 2034 three in four people will survive their cancer for at least 10 years.
Last week Mitchell announced drastic cuts in light predicted falls in income of £160m (30%) in this financial year alone and £300m over three years. The plans include axing 500 staff posts – 24% of its non-trading roles – and potentially cutting research funding from £400m to £250m within the next four to five years. This is on top of a £44m cut to research funding announced in April.
"We are threatened with having to cut our lifesaving research … so we will be in a position where we will be funding less research, which means fewer breakthroughs, fewer new treatments, fewer clinical trials in the future," she says. "And while we can't say exactly what the impact of that is yet, we know there will be a negative [one] for cancer patients."
CRUK is one of the UK's largest charities, with a total income of £672m in 2018-19, the latest available figures. It prides itself as being the largest independent funder of cancer research worldwide, backing pioneering work on the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of a disease that will directly affect one in two of us in our lifetime.
The charity has adapted fundraising initiatives – for example, Race for Life at Home – and is looking for any support that the government can offer, given that CRUK was not eligible for a slice of the £750m coronavirus funding for charities. The Association of Medical Research Charities, of which CRUK is a member, has called on government to bridge the funding gap through a £310m life sciences partnership, matched by funding from charities for at least three years.
"You can't dial up and down research spend like this; it takes years to build," Mitchell says. "The government – and the prime minister particularly – has talked about his commitment to improving cancer survival and yet we are looking over a precipice at the moment where, if we do not get help, we will have to cut our lifesaving research. It doesn't make sense. The government talks about science innovation being at the heart of its future strategy in a post-Brexit world, so we're urging them to support us and other medical research charities at this time. We could pull back from some of the research cuts if the government helps us."
Mitchell is well aware that everyone in the sector is suffering: analysis by the charity Pro Bono Economics found that one in 10 charities face bankruptcy by the end of the year due to the twin pressures of a fundraising shortfall at a time of increased demand for services. "You've seen people give all of their lives, really, to building a cause and effecting change, and people are looking at that to a large extent disappearing or being significantly reduced. So I think we are all hit – small, medium and large – in different ways."
The threat to cancer research funding as a result of the pandemic presents a double whammy for patients who saw a significant reduction in services during lockdown. CRUK estimates a shortfall of around 3 million people in the UK either not screened for cancer, not sent on an urgent suspected cancer referral or not receiving any cancer treatment, compared with normal times.
Another concern has been the number of people who did not approach their GPs with symptoms of potential cancer because of Covid-19. Recent research by University College London (UCL) and Data-Can suggests that 18,000 more people with cancer in England could die as a result of the suspension of treatment and patients deterred from seeking care. "It's a little bit early to tell but we do fear there is going to be a huge impact," says Mitchell.
Dealing with the backlog of patients waiting for screening and treatments adds to the pressures on an already stretched NHS.
For CRUK, the big priority is to ensure that people affected by cancer receive the care and support they need during these "really unprecedented times" and address the "growing backlog of undiagnosed cancers", Mitchell says.
CRUK was part of a coalition of 25 cancer charities that recently published a 12-point plan to get services back on track.
"We need a proper plan which isn't just about being open for business, but it's addressing the backlog, restoring cancer services and transforming [them] in a way that gives us more confidence that we will meet the ambitious cancer survival targets that the government has committed to. But we need more investment in people in the NHS – radiologists, for example – and we need capital expenditures to get the right equipment in place."
Mitchell's tenure at CRUK is the continuation of a long track record in the voluntary sector that in 2015 earned her an OBE. She first witnessed the toll of cancer on a family in her teens when two of her aunts were successively cared for by her mother and other family members. Both women died as a result of their respective cancers – a situation that might have been different today, says Mitchell. "To go through that as a family, as many people do, you feel very strongly that people's lives were taken too soon, and when we look at the progress that we've made today, you would hope that my family members would survive for longer today because of the progress that has been made from the research."
Today, half of those diagnosed will survive their cancer for at least 10 years. The pandemic-related setbacks may have slowed the charity down, but Mitchell is still intent on making that three in four by 2034.
"We are still going for it, but undoubtedly it is harder. But the world around us has changed and we will change too. We will adapt, and we will adapt quickly and we will come back fighting."
Age: 48.
Lives: South London.
Family: Partner, two children.
Education: Sutton high school, Ellesmere Port; University of Manchester, BA (Hons) economics; Birkbeck, University of London, MSc politics and public administration; Harvard Business School Executive Education, global not-for-profit leaders programme – charities; INSEAD, international executive programme.
Career: 2018–present: chief executive, Cancer Research UK; 2016-2020: non-executive director, NHS England; 2013–2018: chief executive, MS Society; 2014–2016, trustee, the King's Fund; 2002–2013: charity director general, Age UK (other posts held include: charity director, director of strategy and communications, head of public affairs); 2001–2007: chair/vice-chair/ trustee, the Fawcett Society; 2000–2002: NSPCC UK government affairs adviser; 1997–2000: head of parliamentary unit, Charter 88; 1994-1997: research assistant/political adviser to Donald Dewar in parliament.
Public life: OBE (2015) for services to the charity sector.
Interests: running, yoga, Liverpool FC, reading.