The 'big society' is long gone. How can we sustain the surge of lockdown volunteers?
Mutual aid groups flourished in the UK during this pandemic. We need proper state funding if they are to continue to grow
In early lockdown the UK experienced a flowering of volunteering not seen since the second world war. Over a million people signed up to the NHS volunteers scheme and traditional charities. Millions more informally supported vulnerable friends and neighbours through mutual aid groups. It was proof, Boris Johnson said, gently reproving Mrs Thatcher, that there was such a thing as society.
Johnson subsequently asked Danny Kruger, the MP for Devizes and a long-time civil society enthusiast, to assess how these "awe-inspiring acts of generosity, public spirit and neighbourliness" could, with government help, be sustained beyond lockdown. How can this new wave of voluntarism be harnessed to help the NHS, public services and young unemployed people? Kruger reports back later this week.
What can we learn from the new voluntarism? First, that its poster-child, the government-backed NHS Volunteer Responders scheme has not been an unalloyed success. Its initial 750,000 signups got lots of publicity; but that shrank to 600,000 once volunteer security checks were done; the latest figures show that of those, just 360,000 put themselves on standby over the past three months. That somewhat depleted volunteer army has carried out 500,000 tasks over the period. Not to be sniffed at, but it is hard not to conclude volunteer supply massively outweighed the demand for help.
The RVS charity, which operates the scheme, claims it has created "a lasting legacy that will transform the shape of volunteering". It refuses to publish much in the way of meaningful data to explain quite how it has achieved this, however, or even say how much was spent on the project, so it is difficult to get a firm grip on its true impact. It appears that in many parts of England it barely registered, leaving a trail of disappointed volunteers with little or nothing to do. Whether, on the plus side, it has created (as it claims) a lasting England-wide digital "volunteer canopy" of on-call support remains to be seen.
The other great civil society phenomenon during the pandemic - and in some ways an alternative model to NHS Volunteer Responders - was the rise of thousands of mutual aid groups, informal neighbourhood-level networks linked by social media. The RVS admits that in many areas it may have been the MAGs that effectively left NHS responders with nothing to do. An interesting recent paper by the New Local Government Network notes how MAGs arrived swiftly and spontaneously to meet demand, guided by local knowledge and unencumbered by bureaucracy. The government's coronavirus shielding programme would have been impossible without it, it argues.
For all the MAGs' achievements, however, initial studies have found that they thrived most in areas with high levels of "social capital" – in general, areas that were wealthier and better-educated – and least in poorer or rural communities. In this it generally mirrors the distribution of traditional charities. A key challenge for Kruger, and Johnson, will be how to "level up" civil society – how to encourage mutualism in places where there is little civic infrastructure, high population churn, low levels of trust, and stark income and ethnic divides.
What is unlikely to succeed is a reiteration of the big society, that ill-fated plan of David Cameron's to reboot the voluntary sector during the early years of austerity, as public services were being cut back. A recurring lesson of the pandemic, not to mention the past decade, is that this kind of centralised, PR-driven and top-down policy approach rarely works. MAGs emerged and thrived not via Whitehall policy directive, but because the lockdown introduction of furloughing – by happy accident – also created a mass cadre of people of working age with time on their hands, motivation to help in a moment of national crisis, and no immediate pressure to seek paid work.
The lesson for the government is not to try and recreate MAGs but to enable where possible the conditions in which they can grow. Furlough won't last, but MAGs also blossomed, another study noted, in places which possessed "abundant community assets where people of different backgrounds can meet and mix" such as community centres, libraries and parks. Zoom meetings and WhatsApp may be the current default but local recoveries, when they come, will be plotted and celebrated in public spaces. Proper state funding of shared, democratically owned and accessible public spaces, especially in the most disadvantaged areas, are unlikely to be top of Kruger's list – calls to invest in local government are perennially unfashionable, especially to a governing party traditionally so easily distracted by the glitter of private philanthropy – but it ought to be.
Patrick Butler is the Guardian's social policy editor
