Playgrounds reopen in Wales: 'It's so lovely to see her having fun'
Children and their parents take advantage of sunny day as cautious easing of restriction continues
It was a momentous day for Sally-Anne Trebilcock and her seven children. Four months after the play area at Jubilee Park in Cardiff was shut because of coronavirus, the swings and balancing bars were back in action again as lockdown restrictions in Wales continued to be eased.
"I'm so glad to see play park back open again," said Trebilcock. "It's been so difficult to keep the children occupied all this time. We're luckier than some. We do have a little garden and a trampoline but they soon get fed up with that."
Six of her children, aged up to 13, dashed around the park. The seventh, three-month-old Luciana, for the most part remained snoozing in her pram.
Trebilcock had also brought with her three extra children who live in the same street, plus a bag full of sandwiches and fruit. Happily, it was sunny and warm. "That makes it even better," said Trebilcock. "We'll have a play and then do 10 or so laps of the park. It's been a challenge keeping them off their phones all these months. This is great."
Mohamed Ebrahim was pushing his three-and-a-half-year-old daughter, Maryam, on a swing. Just behind the pair was the car park of the Cardiff City stadium, where vehicles arrived from time to time at a Covid-19 testing centre.
"It's a reminder that this isn't over yet," said Ebrahim. "I work from home and spend a lot of time with my two kids. Being cooped up in the house can be a bit of a nightmare sometimes. I'm so glad they've opened the play park up. It's good to be out here in the fresh air among the trees. You forget how much you miss it. I've been out and about jogging but it's good that the children have something to do too now."
The Labour-led Welsh government has been more cautious than its English counterpart in easing lockdown restrictions. It is still not possible in Wales to have a drink inside a pub or restaurant, for example.
But from Monday, playgrounds, outdoor gyms, community centres and fairgrounds were allowed to reopen just in time for the start of the summer holidays.
Not all immediately did so. Neath Port Talbot county council in south Wales, for instance, said its 50 council-run playgrounds would not open until next Monday. It said nearly all of its playgrounds have "double bay" swings, which makes physical distancing difficult, and work was under way to adapt them.
Cardiff city council has phased the reopening of its 116 play areas, with the first 30 available for use from Monday, along with its nine outdoor gyms.
New signs were in place asking visitors to wash or sanitise their hands before, after and during using the equipment and to keep a 2-metre distance from others not in their household. Groups were also requested to limit visits to 30 minutes during busy times and to have a maximum of one adult per child in the play area.
The rules did not seem to be spoiling anyone's fun. Across the Welsh capital, children jumped on to scooters and bicycles and headed back to the park.
At Sevenoaks Park, Gagda Shashikant was supervising his four-year-old granddaughter, Jiana Ladhani, on the slide. Shashikant, a London bus driver, said this was the first time he had seen Jiana since lockdown.
"She said to me: 'Nana, I want to go to the park.' So here we are." It's so lovely to see her having fun."
Katie Gale and her daughter Caitlyn, six, were among the first to arrive at The Marl park. Caitlyn said she loved the swings – but actually was already looking forward to getting back to school in September. "I miss it," she said.
Her mother said she had been impressed by how children had coped with the coronavirus crisis. "It's been very difficult for them. There have been claps for the NHS and key workers. I think the kids deserve a clap too. They've been brilliant. At least they've got a bit of freedom now at last to play on the swings."