Test and trace in England less successful in poorer areas, figures show
Exclusive: system reaching lower proportion of at-risk people in poor areas than in wealthy ones
England's poorest communities are at greater risk of a second wave of coronavirus owing to imbalances in the national test-and-trace system, official figures suggest.
Data obtained by the Guardian shows that a much lower proportion of at-risk people are being contacted and told to self-isolate in deprived towns than in wealthier areas.
In Blackpool, 37% of people who had been in close contact with an infected person were not reached by the system. This compares with 9% in Cheshire East, which includes the affluent towns of Knutsford and Wilmslow.
Similarly, in Knowsley, Merseyside, more than one in three at-risk people were not contacted, compared with one in 10 in Trafford, a mostly upmarket borough of Greater Manchester.
The divide may mean fewer people in deprived communities are self-isolating after being in close contact with an infected person, potentially worsening outbreaks in areas where people are already twice as likely to die from Covid-19 as those in less deprived areas.
The government's Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) has said that at least 80% of contacts would need to isolate for the test-and-trace system to be effective and that any delay beyond 48-72 hours in someone self-isolating would result in a significant increase to the infection rate.
Andy Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester, and council leaders have for weeks been asking for more data to help plug "gaping holes" in the £10bn centralised test-and-trace system, contracts for which were awarded to private companies including Serco and Sitel.
Local officials say they have the community links and long-established relationships to hunt down the virus at street level.
Under the current system, contact tracers attempt to reach close contacts of an infected person by text, email or up to 10 times by phone call. However, if people do not answer or return the calls, there is little else the system can do. Without named patient data, councils are unable to direct a door-knocking exercise that might have more success.
Data for north-west England, which has the second highest number of Covid-19 cases in the country, shows that on average 83% of close contacts of an infected person were reached by call-handlers. But in the more deprived local authorities, the contact rate drops significantly.
The five local authorities with the lowest contact-tracing rate – Blackburn with Darwen, Blackpool, Knowsley, Rochdale and Oldham – all have among the highest proportion of more deprived neighbourhoods in England.
In Blackburn with Darwen, only 56% of close contacts were reached, prompting the local director of public health, Prof Dominic Harrison, to warn colleagues that they were at risk of losing control of the virus because of failures in the national system.
In an internal report on Saturday, Harrison said there appeared to be a "clear connection" between deprivation and the test and trace success rate. On Monday Blackburn with Darwen overtook Leicester as the local authority with the highest infection rate per 100,000 of the population.
One theory is that some people in poorer areas may feel unable to self-isolate because they cannot afford to live on the statutory sick pay of £95.85 a week, and so do not respond to the calls. Labour has urged the government to made additional support available to businesses and workers who have to self-isolate.
Allen Brett, the leader of Rochdale borough council, which has England's third highest rate of cases and some of its most deprived wards, said the virus was disproportionately affecting the poorest and black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) communities in the town.
"It's almost like doing a map of which are the richest areas – they've got the fewest cases. Which are the poorest areas? They've got the most cases. That's a sad fact. This is a disease that hits the poor," he said.
Brett said Rochdale's rate of infection was falling but not as fast as officials had hoped. Its infection rate is 44.1 per 100,000 of the population, compared with 79.2 in Blackburn with Darwen.
The data for the north-west shows that people in poorer communities are also more likely to have been in close contact with more people than those in wealthier areas, possibly owing to cramped housing, working conditions and multi-generational families.
The Department of Health and Social Care said test and trace had helped isolate more than 180,000 cases, and it was working closely with local authorities in England. It said the service "relies on everyone playing their part", adding: "Please book a test if you have symptoms, self-isolate and help us trace anyone you've been in contact with."