Senior Tory accuses Johnson of blaming NHS for government's Covid-19 failings
Exclusive: Andrew Lansley says ministers made mistakes over lockdown, PPE and testing
Andrew Lansley, the Conservative former health secretary, has criticised the government's handling of the Covid-19 pandemic and accused it of trying to blame the NHS for its own failings.
Lansley made clear that delays in instigating the lockdown, ordering personal protective equipment (PPE) for NHS staff and increasing testing were made by ministers, not health service bosses.
Lansley – now a Tory peer – also said Boris Johnson's plan to grab more direct control of the NHS, as revealed in the Guardian last week, was wrong and would undermine the service.
Writing in the Guardian, Lansley pinned the blame for Britain's unsuccessful attempts to control the coronavirus and unusually high death rate on ministers being slow to act when the pandemic struck.
"It was central government that was in charge of the decisions on lockdown, on PPE procurement and on testing, where the delays impacted most. The lesson of the pandemic response in England is not that there is a lack of central control [of the NHS], but too much of it," he wrote.
Successive years of cuts to local councils' health budgets also damaged the capacity of public health teams to help expand testing of people displaying symptoms of the virus, he said.
His comments came on the day Radix, the thinktank of which he is a director, published a paper calling for greater decentralisation of the NHS in response to the Covid-19 pandemic.
The Guardian disclosed that the prime minister has set up a health and social care taskforce to devise ways in which the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) can regain the direct control of the NHS in England that it had until Lansley's Health and Social Care Act 2012. That led to NHS England being handed operational independence to run the service, which means ministers cannot order its powerful and widely admired chief executive, Sir Simon Stevens, to implement changes that they favour.
Ministers, including the health secretary, Matt Hancock, want to reduce Stevens' power and regard him as having been "invisible" during the pandemic and not being accountable enough.
In his article, Lansley claimed that Johnson's desire to regain control was an attempt to line up NHS leaders as scapegoats for the flaws in the official response to the Covid-19 crisis.
"It would be a travesty if, just as the NHS gets the money it needs to transform towards a digital, innovative, outcomes-directed, patient-focused future, central government misrepresents the lessons of Covid in an attempt to shift blame and seize back central control," he wrote.
He dismissed three possible changes being considered by the taskforce as unnecessary: changing the foundation trust status many hospitals have, sidelining the clinical commissioning groups created in Lansley's shake-up, and putting integrated care systems on a legal footing.
Governmental failure to tackle problems such as housing, education, deprivation and Britain's rising tide of illness were behind the NHS's struggle to cope with the demand for care, according to Lansley. "None of these problems will be addressed by taking yet more power to the DHSC, which is surely more about assigning blame than finding solutions," he wrote.
Johnson confirmed on Wednesday at prime minister's questions that an independent inquiry would be held into the government's handling of the pandemic, but gave no further details.
Health thinktank bosses endorsed Lansley's analysis.
Richard Murray, chief executive of the King's Fund and a former senior official at the DHSC, said: "The most problematic parts of the pandemic response, such as availability of testing and PPE, were not primarily led by NHS England. Meanwhile, the NHS-led scaling up of intensive care capacity was one of the country's biggest success stories. It is therefore hard to argue that the government's difficulties handling the pandemic were down to the NHS having too much independence."Nigel Edwards, chief executive of the Nuffield Trust thinktank, said: "Lord Lansley probably realises that the reform he started in 2010 quickly snowballed into an all-consuming scramble to shuffle managers and responsibilities around, distracting everyone for years. He has very good grounds on which to warn his successors off.
"Centralising still more power into the DHSC seems a strange response to a pandemic which has probably left central government departments with more difficult questions to answer than NHS England. The serial failures in testing, track and trace, the NHS supply chain and guidance around PPE are all areas under Whitehall's control.
"There is a strong argument that the NHS is already far too centralised compared with other countries' health services, many of which perform better despite having a comparatively weak line of accountability with the minister of health."
A health department spokesperson said: "This is an unprecedented global pandemic, and at every stage we have been guided by the best scientific advice, and the decisive action we took made sure the NHS had the capacity it needed to save lives.
"Two billion items of PPE have been delivered and over 30bn ordered so that we have a continuous supply, and we have a testing programme capable of delivering over 300,000 every day, providing a test to anybody who needs one.
"We will continue to learn the lessons from the pandemic, and yesterday the prime minister announced a further £3bn in funding to help the NHS to prepare."