'We were lambs led to slaughter': life inside a care home during Covid-19
Care workers risked their lives tackling coronavirus only to be blamed for high numbers of infections by the UK prime minister
Those of us who work in health and care have all dealt with death: it's part of our job and we know it's going to happen. But the coronavirus crisis has altered the dynamic. Over the past few months, the care home I work in has felt like death's waiting room. We were told that even critically ill people would not be taken to hospital and we felt helpless as we lost nearly a third of our residents.
At the end of March, we received a man from the local hospital. I was doing my rounds with a nurse when we walked into his room and saw he had all the symptoms of coronavirus. We looked at each other and knew that this was just the start. All night, we shared our anxieties for our residents, our families and ourselves. It was the first time I had felt fear at work.
Within a week, the patient was moved downstairs to a high-security dementia unit because that was felt to be the most appropriate place for him. He had not been tested for Covid-19. Less than a week later, there were many people on the unit with fevers.
Soon, staffing levels began to drop because people were getting seriously ill. At least three members of staff were hospitalised for extended periods of time. There were times when we were at 50% staffing capacity. We still didn't have adequate personal protective equipment (PPE). Whenever I raised the issue in team meetings, I was snapped at.
More staff fell sick and the death rate among residents started rising. It was a train wreck. I came in for my night shift one day and discovered we had lost three residents on one unit in a matter of hours. There was an eerie silence when I walked in, only broken by a nurse crying.
Coming on to shift to colleagues crying became the norm. We felt like lambs led to slaughter. We had no testing and were not given the opportunity to provide the care to residents that we come to work to give. We were overwhelmed with guilt.
Some residents were aware of what was happening. There was a lot of anxiety and it was a very depressing environment. They weren't able to see their families and all the social activities that they look forward to were cancelled. They were confined to their rooms for weeks. If residents didn't have their own phone, they had to rely on us to enable communication, but we were so busy and couldn't always help.
An emergency team meeting was held. The care home manager said they were considering a lock-in if enough staff agreed to work it. It would be voluntary and would last a week during which no one would come or go. I was confused by the fact that it was a week because that is not the incubation period, but we were all so flustered that we didn't question it. I volunteered immediately. I'm 24 and had already had Covid-19, so I felt safer. We were told that there would have to be a minimum of 17 members of staff in order for a lock-in to happen.
Some days later, I got a call saying the lock-in would start the following evening. When I turned up there were only 12 of us who were meant to provide 24/7 care for the whole home, which caters for 60 residents. We were told which unit we would be working on and that was it. The unit I was on had five care assistants and two nurses for 21 residents. Normally we would have one nurse and three care assistants for 15, and a separate team would come in for the night.
We didn't get any days off. I ended up working 16-hour days, typically from 8.30pm to 9.30am before trying to get a few hours sleep on a thin mattress on the floor in a shared room. I'd get back up and work 1.30pm until 4.30pm, sleep some more and then work the night again. I worked 110 hours in seven days on minimal sleep. It was not safe. If I had a family member in a care home and knew that someone as sleep-deprived, stressed and emotional as me was looking after them, I would be distraught. But we had no choice. It was devastating.
Everyone on the lock-in team broke down at different times over the week. For me, it was after staying with one of my long-term patients in the early hours until he passed away, with no family by his side. After that shift I called my boyfriend and wept.
Residents went without showers for weeks. One morning I went in to help get a woman up and she looked distressed. I asked her what was wrong and she started crying. All she said was: "I know you don't have time to help me have a shower but can you please wash my hair over the sink?" Her hair looked awful, her head was itchy and she felt horrible. But I was on autopilot, I had so much to do and had to say no. That sort of thing happened a lot. The standard of care was not good enough.
I feel lucky that I at least had a fantastic team to work with, but we received little support from the corporation that the care home is part of, the local council or the government. When the new members of staff came in after the week, we all cried. Seeing new faces that reminded us of normality was overwhelming.
We weren't tested before or after the lock-in. The PPE we had was still not adequate. We had dust masks and gloves with no eyewear. At one point, management sent out a text asking if anybody had any spare bed sheets that could be fashioned into washable gowns.
The lock-in served no purpose. Coronavirus was still present in the care home, and more staff became ill.
The prime minister, Boris Johnson, has since said that care homes were to blame for the UK's high death toll. To make such a claim after thousands of us put our lives on the line to protect our residents is devastating. We are care workers; our job is hard but we do it for our residents. But things need to change.
If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series about experiences in healthcare during the coronavirus outbreak, get in touch by emailing sarah.johnson@theguardian.com