Face masks not compulsory in takeaways in England, says Sharma
Business secretary enters fray to contradict health secretary's view that coverings are compulsory in coffee shops
Only 24 hours earlier the health secretary, Matt Hancock, couldn't have been clearer, declaring that new rules will mean that people grabbing a takeaway from a sandwich shop must wear a face mask.
But now his cabinet colleague, Alok Sharma, has claimed that face coverings will be only a recommendation – not compulsory – for people going into cafes for takeaway food.
Sharma, the business secretary, said masks would indeed be mandatory in shops and supermarkets in England from next Friday, clarifying that their use would be only encouraged for people getting takeaways.
"People will be required to wear face coverings, from 24 July when they go into supermarkets or shops," he told Sky News on Thursday, adding: "Face coverings are not compulsory when you're going into a restaurant, and a cafe and you're sitting down to have a meal as you've just heard from your interview yesterday with the health secretary.
"But what we're also saying is we're encouraging people to wear face coverings when they're going into a cafe or a food-to-go establishment and they're not going to be sitting down and having a meal."
It comes after Downing Street was left red-faced on Tuesday when ministers Liz Truss and Michael Gove were pictured leaving the same Pret a Manger branch in Westminster only minutes apart with only the former wearing a mask. Later that day, Hancock announced in the Commons that face coverings would be mandatory in English shops from 24 July in an attempt to reassure visitors to the high street amid fears over Covid-19.
Asked about the contrasting images on Wednesday morning, Hancock told Sky News they were taken before his announcement, and he clarified: "You do need to wear a face mask in Pret because Pret is a shop … in hospitality, so in a restaurant, there needs to be table service. If there's table service then it's not necessary to have a mask but in any shop you do need the mask. So if you're going up to the counter in Pret to buy takeaway, that is a shop, that is Pret operating as a shop."
However, later the same day the prime minister's spokesman appeared to contradict Hancock's assessment saying: "My understanding is that it wouldn't be mandatory if you went in, for example, to a sandwich shop in order to get a takeaway, to wear a face covering. Where it is mandatory … we're talking about supermarkets and other shops."
On Thursday, during his Sky News interview, Sharma also appeared to contradict Hancock. Asked specifically whether from next Friday an individual going into Pret for takeaway food or drink would have to wear a mask, Sharma replied: "It won't be compulsory but we will certainly encourage it."
Pressed on whether Hancock was wrong in his comments made to Sky 24 hours earlier: "What the health secretary said yesterday was that … you're not required to wear one if you're sitting down and having a meal."
When it was pointed out to Sharma that he had just said masks were not mandatory for people getting takeaway, he replied: "I said that it is recommended and I hope I provide the clarification at this juncture."
Asked to clarify once more, Sharma said: "The definitive is that it is encouraged for you to do so."
Pressed on whether it was legally binding, the minister replied: "Well, if you're going into a shop or supermarket from 24 July it is mandatory but … it's pretty clear what we've said and I'm very happy to repeat it once again. Mandatory on public transport, mandatory in shops from 24 July in shops and supermarkets."
Asked again whether you need to wear a mask if you go for a takeaway coffee, Sharma said: "We are recommending that you wear a mask if you are popping in and getting food to go, we are recommending that people wear a face covering."