UK train passengers to be tempted back with 'travel safe this summer' campaign
Operators move to boost drastically reduced use of public transport amid Covid-19 crisis
Train companies are hoping to encourage commuters back on to public transport with a "travel safe this summer" campaign, as Boris Johnson urges a bigger return to work.
The government is reviewing its guidance, in place since lockdown started, to work from home where possible. The prime minister said last week the public should "go back to work if you can".
Johnson is expected to set out the next steps in easing the lockdown in a press conference on Friday, where he may also hail the results of the latest stage of the Oxford vaccine trial, which has been tested on rhesus macaque monkeys.
Asked about the trial's progress on Wednesday, his spokesman said: "While any possible step forwards to find a safe and effective vaccine would be encouraging, you wouldn't expect me to speculate on results that have not been published yet."
It is understood that train operating companies are moving to a "travel safe this summer" message, with increased emphasis on handwashing and face masks, which have been compulsory on public transport since 15 June.
The shift would be a first step in boosting use of public transport. Transport for London is running 94% of its services, but with passenger numbers at only about 20% of the levels at the same point in 2019.
The government will likely need to change its guidance, which states that travellers should "consider all other forms of transport before using public transport". A transport industry source said they expected a change from the Department for Transport "very soon".
Johnson's call for more people to return to work came alongside mixed messages over mask-wearing, which were resolved on Wednesday when the health secretary, Matt Hancock, announced it will become mandatory in shops from 24 July.
Although a majority of UK workers travel to work by car or van, restrictions on public transport are seen as one of the main obstacles for many workers returning to offices in cities, and London in particular. Increasing car travel is not thought to be viable in cities because of congestion, as well as the likelihood of increased carbon dioxide emissions.
Andy Bagnall, chief strategy officer at the Rail Delivery Group, representing UK train companies, said: "Rail companies want to support the government in striking the difficult balance between reopening the economy, which of course means more rail travel, and guarding against a further widespread outbreak of the virus.
"As the economy reopens this summer that means reassuring people so they have confidence to travel safely while adhering to government advice. Train operators are maximising capacity, boosting cleaning and helping with hygiene while also asking passengers to travel at quieter times where they can and to protect others by wearing a face covering."
Rail companies across the UK have been subsidised by the government with billions of pounds of emergency funding to keep empty services running.
The government is concerned about the impact on city centre economies of the vast majority of workers continuing to stay at home, after the latest UK GDP figures for May suggested growth was weaker than expected.
However, unions and business groups have warned against a hasty return to the office.
Frances O'Grady, general secretary of the Trades Union Congress, said: "The government should not rush out any announcements without proper thought or consultation … Ministers must also recognise that re-opening offices is not enough to fix the economy. The government must do far more to protect and create jobs."
She added that people with caring responsibilities or those who were advised to shield may need to continue to work from home for the foreseeable future.
Businesses have expressed concern that some messaging from government on reopening workplaces has contradicted guidance or left uncertainty for employers who have a legal obligation to take reasonable steps to provide a safe workplace for workers.
Josh Hardie, deputy director-general of the Confederation of British Industry, said companies needed "consistency and openness if and when advice evolves" after apparently conflicting reports on the wearing of face masks in shops and offices. The Daily Telegraph on Tuesday reported that masks could be made compulsory in all public places, but Hancock ruled out the move on Wednesday.
The Department for Transport was approached for comment.