GCSE and A-level exams in all subjects to be available in autumn
Pupils dissatisfied with results based on predicted grades will be able to sit traditional exams
GCSE and A-level pupils in England who are unhappy with their predicted grades this summer will be able to sit exams in all subjects in the autumn to try to improve their mark, the exams regulator has confirmed.
Ofqual said a full series of exams would be made available to students who were unable to sit their summer exams after they were cancelled because of the Covid-19 crisis, and are dissatisfied with grades based on teacher assessment.
Students who believe their results may have been affected by bias or discrimination will be told to take it up with their school in the first instance, according to new draft guidance. If there is evidence of serious malpractice, exam boards will be expected to investigate.
Headteachers had argued that the autumn series should be restricted to A-levels and GCSE English and maths because of concerns about the practical challenges already facing schools as they open up to all pupils from September.
However, following a consultation, Ofqual ruled that exam boards must make exams available in all subjects at all levels in the additional autumn series beginning in October. Results will be based on exams alone, while pupils doing art and design will be set a task to complete under supervised conditions.
Exam boards will be expected to have the usual arrangements for reviews of marking and appeals in place, and students will be able to request a replacement certificate.
Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said pupils and parents could be confident this summer's grades would be every bit as valid as in any other year, without the need to enter for exams in the autumn.
"We are concerned about how schools and colleges will be able to accommodate and manage a full suite of autumn exams alongside the huge challenge of bringing all their pupils back in September, identifying learning gaps, and putting catch-up support in place," he said. "All of this will have to be done while managing the risks associated with coronavirus."
The University and College Union (UCU) warned that disadvantaged students who were unhappy with their results could still miss out. UCU's general secretary, Jo Grady, said: "Research has shown that disadvantaged students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds are more likely to be predicted lower grades than their more affluent counterparts.
"The only option for students who are unhappy with their results is to spin the roulette wheel with high-stakes exams, which will not be the right fit for all and may disadvantage those with special educational needs."
Ofqual said anyone with concerns about "bias, discrimination or any other fact that suggests that a centre did not behave with care or integrity" when issuing calculated grades this summer should complain to their school in the first instance.
"Where there is evidence, we require exam boards to investigate allegations as potential malpractice or maladministration," Ofqual said. "We expect such allegations to be rare, but this is an important safeguard for students and their overall confidence in this year's grading arrangements."