We need far more coronavirus tests in British prisons
Prisoners are being kept in isolation, but without widespread testing, they could bring the virus out with them on release
Shortly after Covid-19 began to bring death and despair to our shores, the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) started issuing daily, weekday media briefings on the impact of the disease across the penal estate in England and Wales. The briefings began by listing the numbers of prisoners and staff who had tested positive for the disease. But the figures for prisoners are way below those forecast by many concerned prison watchers.
In March, the Prison Governors Association in England and Wales, together with reform groups, politicians from all sides, and the Prison Officers Association, called for the early release of prisoners, to avoid a "jail pandemic".
There was some hope that those fears were being listened to. In April, the government announced that 4,000 prisoners would be released, as well as pregnant women, mothers of babies and around 1,200 vulnerable prisoners. But to date, fewer than 175 prisoners have been granted early release.
However, according to the MoJ briefings, the prison system, far from being overwhelmed, has seemingly coped well with the Covid-19 crisis.
How has this happened, in a system where, according to a detailed report published  earlier this year, many prisons failed to provide "basic medical care, in particular a "lack of provision for people with complex physical and/or mental health needs", alongside a failure to assess, monitor and review prisoners' existing health conditions?
According to the prisons minister Lucy Fraser, quoted in MoJ briefings, their "success" is due to "our extremely careful handling of the initial phase of the pandemic".
However, soon after the crisis began, I received information from sources at Wandsworth prison, which appeared to make a mockery, at least in that south London jail, of Fraser's claim of "extremely careful handling". Initially, the MoJ disputed the claims, but did not challenge the bones of the two stories which followed. Both reported a clumsy, chaotic approach to the disease, rather than a careful one.
In all, fewer than 100 prisoners have been tested at Wandsworth, those sources tell me. Earlier this month, the MoJ told me the last prisoner test at Wandsworth prison was on 21 April. They have since confirmed several tests were carried out at the end of June. Is it feasible that in a jail holding 1,400 men, many elderly, none had presented with a high temperature, cough, or other symptom in two months?
Last Friday, the MoJ said 510 prisoners in England and Wales had tested positive for Covid-19 since the crisis began. Given the normal ratio of positive/negative tests, that would suggest that thousands are being tested, yet the evidence I have seen suggests that there is only minimal testing of prisoners in some prisons. According to my sources, testing has been extremely limited in at least 10 other prisons in England and Wales, including two that have a high number of inmates over 70, and one, Littlehey in Cambridgeshire, where three prisoners have died from Covid-19.
The Ministry of Justice did not answer detailed questions about precisely how many tests have been carried out since 21 April. But in a statement, a Prison Service spokesman said: "It would be inflammatory and untrue to suggest testing has not been carried out. Hundreds of tests have taken place at the prisons mentioned, and thousands more across the whole prison estate.
"Public Health England has said the measures we introduced are working to limit the spread of the virus."
There are about 1,700 prisoners over 70 in England and Wales, with many in their 80s and a growing number over 90. All are at high risk of dying from Covid-19. To date, the MoJ has reported that 23 prisoners have lost their lives to Covid-19 across the penal estate.
If the government has any sort of a grip on coronavirus in jails, it has only been achieved by depriving prisoners of many basic human rights. Inmates are being confined to their cells for more than 23 hours a day, longer still on weekends.
We don't know when lockdown measures will be eased in prisons, despite rules being relaxed from 4 July. The MoJ says any easing will be "in line with public health guidance" and that plans will be published "in due course".
The psychological and physical damage is huge. Prison inspectors have already found increased self-harm rates in female jails.
And figures from Inquest show that there were 20 more deaths between 24 March and 27 May 2020 than the same period in 2019 in prisons in England and Wales, even though there are 4,300 fewer prisoners locked up this year. Although we don't yet know how many of the 74 deaths were self-inflicted because the Prisons and Probation Ombudsman which investigates deaths in custody, has operated a vastly reduced service since the prison lockdown began. However, we know that of the 54 deaths in prison over the two-month period last year, close to a third were suicide. So it is likely that a significant number of the latest deaths will eventually be recorded as self-inflicted.
Prisoners who have tested positive, or have shown symptoms of coronavirus, have been placed in isolation where conditions are reportedly even more appalling. I have seen evidence from inmates, their families and prison officers at an increasing number of jails, of prisoners not leaving their cells for the two-week quarantine period. No showers, no exercise and their food left outside their cell doors. I have received several accounts of prisoners in isolation, with no access to hot water or soap. And families telling me they were informed their relatives had tested positive and were in isolation – then hearing absolutely nothing for the duration of their quarantine.
Prison grapevines do not wither during lockdowns. Inmates on normal wings hear of the conditions for those in quarantine on isolation landings. Small wonder then that, according to my sources, many prisoners displaying symptoms are simply not reporting them; unwilling to swap their already restricted regime for one even worse.
You do not have to be a reformer, or Guardian reader, to be concerned. Hundreds of prisoners are released every week, crisis or no. Many will be healthy: on the evidence I am seeing, many others may be bringing this disease out with them.
Eric Allison is prisons correspondent for the Guardian