Leicester lockdown: what are the new Covid-19 restrictions?
Spike in infections forces non-essential shops to close from Tuesday and schools from Thursday
A regional flare-up of coronavirus cases means Leicester will not emerge from parts of lockdown as swiftly as the rest of England. Here's what you need to know about the restrictions:
A spike in infections in Leicester means the city has three times more cases than the city with the next highest total.
Non-essential shops that reopened on 15 June will close on 30 June.
Bars, restaurants and hairdressers will not open on 4 July
Schools will close on 2 July, except to vulnerable children and children of key workers.
The city council is reviewing its plans to extend the opening of its own buildings such as libraries, museums and children's centres.
As well as the city of Leicester, which had a population 329,839 people at the 2011 census, the "surrounding conurbation" will also be affected.
On Tuesday night Leicester City council's website said they were awaiting confirmation of the exact areas affected. However, Hancock cited the town of Oadby and the villages of Glenfield and Birstall as examples, adding: "We will be publishing the exact details of which wards are included in these measures imminently."
Yes: all but essential travel to, from and within the city is discouraged.
Residents are being told to stay at home unless absolutely necessary and observe two-metre social distancing.
Extra facilities have been set up for walk-in tests and more home testing kits are being made available as anyone with symptoms must come forward for a test, the health secretary, Hancock, said.
Leicester currently has three mobile testing sites in the city in Evington, Spinney Hill Park and Victoria park, and a more permanent facility on the edge of Leicester at the Birstall park and ride site.
An indoor testing centre is due to open on Tuesday at the Highfields community centre, and further testing sites are planned according to the city's council.
Anyone who tests positive should stay at home for seven days, and members of their household should stay at home for 14 days.
Hancock said the measures will be reviewed in two weeks.
Extra money was being sent to Leicester and Leicestershire councils "to support them to enhance their communications" as well as making support available for people who need to self-isolate, according to Hancock.
Authorities will also help workplaces with coronavirus clusters through councils to "implement more stringently the Covid-secure guidelines".