Case study: Covid-19 UK survivor recalls her all too real 'nightmare'
Tracy, 59, is being treated for post-traumatic stress disorder after 18-day stint in hospital
Months after she was discharged from hospital after falling ill with Covid-19, there's one particular moment that continues to haunt Tracy.
"They said: 'Do you have a message for your family?'", she recalled. "I'd heard them say it to everyone else. It basically means they don't know whether you're coming out or not. Oh my God, that haunts the hell out of you."
Unlike many other patients who fell seriously ill after contracting coronavirus, Tracy was not intubated and put on a ventilator, meaning she can vividly remember everything that was going on around her during her 18-day stint at Whittington hospital in north London.
"You are so busy concentrating on trying to get your next breath, you're not even aware that you're in shock," the 59-year-old mother of two said. "It has a really profound effect on you if you're aware of your circumstances. I must have seen at least eight people die.
"And the fear in people's eyes is shocking. Everyone – consultants, nurses, anyone who was allowed in there – you could see how frightened they were."
Now she's safely back home with her family, she's finding her mental recovery is just as challenging as her physical one.
"I didn't sleep for three weeks because when I tried to go to sleep in hospital, I was dying, and I was frightened to go to sleep without the oxygen. Sixty percent of my hair's falling out. I have flashbacks and this impending sense of doom.
"It's very real. It's like a nightmare with your eyes open."
She now has two counsellors, who have diagnosed her with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and she is using approaches such as meditation and visualisation to work through some of the trauma.
Along with grief for the people alongside her in hospital who didn't make it, she feels a sense of survivor's guilt. "I don't really fully understand how I made it myself," she said.
"It is really taking a lot of effort to undo what I saw and what I experienced. It's going to take a while, because you're still feeling the effects of it and it's still all around you, on the TV and in the news.
"I was asked by my kids and people around me to get help. And I'm telling you, I'm taking all the help I can get because I feel I really need it. I really do."