'End of hibernation': what the papers say about England's lockdown easing
Front pages seek to balance relief with the dangers that coronavirus still poses
A combination of sunny weather and the approaching relaxation of coronavirus lockdown rules in England has led to jubilation on some front pages today, as others mark the start of the end of "our long national hibernation".
"Summer's back on!" says the Daily Mail, and quotes Boris Johnson urging people to get out and enjoy themselves. It notes, however, the move is a "calculated gamble to head off economic disaster".
The Express takes a similar tack. It uses a picture of the prime minister with beer held aloft alongside the headline: "Cheers Boris! Here's to a brighter Britain". It tempers the joy with a message across the top: "PM: we're coming out of hibernation but virus still a risk". Metro also uses the pub theme with "Get the beers in".
The Sun says: "Vast orders" along with a picture showing lots of beer. It reports people are getting ready for "super Saturday" when pubs will open
The prime minister's "hibernation" comment was the pick of the rest of the papers.
The Guardian balances the relief with the still-serious dangers the virus poses. "PM hails 'end of hibernation' – but scientists urge caution" is the headline, beside a grim-faced Johnson delivering the news of the "one-metre plus" rules coming in on 4 July.
The Telegraph quotes Johnson for its headline: "Our hibernation is beginning to end, the bustle is coming back". Underneath, a comment piece by associate editor Camilla Tominey is headlined: "So we gingerly get back to normal – in a world that is anything but".
The Times has a straightforward: "Hibernation at an end" and a handy box of the incoming guidelines at a glance. It also joins other papers in looking at the life and death of film financier Steve Bing.
The Mirror appears more discombobulated than celebratory in its treatment of the guidelines. "Life … but not as we know it", is the headline above "Britain unlocked".
The FT gives the bottom half of its front to the coronavirus news. "Johnson gives green light to reopen pubs despite "great worries" of chief adviser," is their headline but the main story is about the arrest of former Wirecard CEO Markus Braun on suspicion of falsifying accounts.
Virus-wise in Scotland, the National reports on anger at BBC Scotland for cutting off the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, in order to receive an update on the virus in England.
The Herald reports on the two-metre rule staying in place in Scotland. Sturgeon has said she will be able to give "more clarity" later this week on a timeline for the next steps out of lockdown.
The Scotsman says the country will follow the example of nations such as Australia and scrap social distancing measures between pupils in schools.