National Gallery to lead return to cultural life in England
London venue will become first of big museums and galleries to reopen as lockdown eases
The National Gallery is expected to become the first of England's big museums and galleries to reopen. Subsequent openings of other venues will be staggered to help ease pressure on public transport.
Museums such as Tate Modern, the British Museum and the V&amp;A will announce their plans in the coming days. But first up, the Guardian understands, will be the National Gallery in London.
Museum bosses welcomed an announcement by Boris Johnson that England's museums, galleries and cinemas can reopen from 4 July, but say they will proceed with extreme caution.
In a joint statement, the directors of Tate, Science Museum Group, the Natural History Museum, the National Gallery, the British Museum and the V&amp;A welcomed the news.
"The British public have faced a wretched few months of isolation, loss and anxiety in confronting the Covid-19 pandemic," they said. "The reopening of museums – whose galleries speak to the creative, resilient power of the human spirit – will provide solace and inspiration as Britain looks to the future.
Jenny Waldman, director of the Art Fund, warned that the future of many galleries and museums remained uncertain. "The lockdown closures have hit museums' finances incredibly hard – some may never reopen, and for those that can, social distancing measures will drastically limit visitor numbers and associated income that make them economically viable."
Tim Marlow, director of the Design Museum in London, said he was keen to open the electronic music exhibition, which had been due to begin on 1 April. "Cautiously, this is music to my ears," he said. "We've been ready to go for some time, in terms of content, but we are still working through logistics."
Those logistics will include a one-way system, extended opening hours but reduced capacity, with visitors having to book time slots, new signage and hand sanitisers, some of them based on a design competition the museum ran earlier this year.
For all museums and galleries, questions remain about the economics of operating with fewer people, and over how nervous visitors will be.
Marlow said reducing the physical distancing limit from 2 metres to 1 metre would help. "It will just give us a bit more leeway, but we have to start cautiously," he said.
Iwona Blazwick, director of the Whitechapel Gallery in east London, said she hoped to reopen in mid-July. "We have been counting the days," she said. "It has been so tragic to have all these wonderful things on display and locked away like sleeping beauties, so we are really excited to be able to welcome people back."
The gallery will have a one-way system and a timed-and-booked entry scheme, staff will wear "art visors" made at Goldsmiths. Blazwick does not expect significant problems. "People are used to navigating their way round supermarkets, and we have a lot more space," she said.
Jonathan Watkins, director of the Ikon gallery in Birmingham, said the news, on an emotional level, was great. "We love what we do and we really want to get back to it. It was deflating to open an exhibition in February and close it in March and to have it sitting there, hibernating … so this is a good feeling."
He thinks the Ikon will be able to reopen in August because of the time needed to deal with logistical issues. That includes what to do with the gallery's famous "singing" lift, which features a choral work by the conceptual artist Martin Creed.
"People won't really be able to use it without going to reception first, and someone will come along with a key. How will we do that? There is all that kind of stuff because we have got to take it all very seriously. It is not just an academic exercise."
Theatres and concert halls were told they cannot yet reopen for live performances and fears remain that the industry faces ruin without targeted further government help.
A spokesperson for the Society of London Theatre said: "We welcome the easing of lockdown restrictions and look forward to continuing to work closely with the government on a date when theatres can reopen."