Publish action taken to support BAME people in pandemic, says Doreen Lawrence
Exclusive: Labour peer writes to PM for steps implemented and future-action timescale
Doreen Lawrence has spoken out for the first time about Covid-19 and its impact on the black and minority ethnic community by demanding the government publish what steps it has taken to help frontline workers.
The Labour peer and the party's race relations adviser has written to the prime minister to ask which of the seven recommendations from a Public Health England report into the BAME community and the virus have been implemented, as well as a timescale for future action.
In a joint letter with Marsha de Cordova MP, Labour's shadow women and equalities secretary, Lady Lawrence warned that people's lives were at risk over the delays.
The mother of the murdered teenager Stephen Lawrence also highlighted the two-week gap between the report coming out and the latest recommendations. In the letter she said: "We fear this has become another example of the government acting too slowly to deal with this crisis. By failing to take urgent action, it is putting the lives of black, Asian and minority ethnic people at risk.
"Now is the time to tackle systematic racism, discrimination and injustice in Britain. We therefore call on the government to immediately publish what steps it has already taken to implement these vital recommendations in full, alongside a timeline for their completion."
Her pressure on the prime minister comes after two reports were released by PHE into the higher death rate among BAME people compared with the white population from the virus and the death rate among health and care staff.
The first, released on 2 June, was called a "review of disparities" and was criticised for not making specific recommendations. The second, published on 16 June, was entitled "beyond the data" and asked for specific health messages for the community, better data collection and occupational risk assessments for key workers.
The minister for equalities, Kemi Badenoch, said recently that the government was committed to taking the 2 June report very seriously and said collecting better data on ethnicity was "already in train".
However, seven specific recommendations were made in the second report. They include: the mandatory collection of ethnicity data from death certificates; developing risk assessments for BAME workers; specific health messages to target ethnic groups on conditions such as diabetes, asthma and high blood pressure; funding education and prevention campaigns that work with local BAME and faith communities; and to ensure the Covid-19 recovery strategies do not create further inequalities.
Lawrence was appointed in April by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, to conduct a review into the impact of Covid-19 on the BAME community.