Ministerial role needed to fix unequal education system, say MPs
Cross-party group want more diversity in England's Stem curriculum after BLM protests
A new ministerial post should be created to address the "entrenched inequity" in England's education system, which is holding back pupils from diverse backgrounds, according to a cross-party group of parliamentarians.
The role is vital, they say, especially in the context of the Black Lives Matter movement, which has called for greater diversity in the curriculum, and the disproportionate impact that the Covid-19 pandemic is likely to have on the most disadvantaged.
A report by the all-party parliamentary group on diversity and inclusion in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (Stem) education calls on the government to make it more relevant to the lives of all young people.
It highlights the need for a coordinated government approach to tackle the causes of inequity in the education system, with a focus on the role of schools in GCSE choices, which can affect how pupils progress, and their access to good careers education.
Labour MP Chi Onwurah, chair of the APPG, said: "The recent global protests on inequality have only further served to highlight that we must continually review the systems we have in place to ensure they are fit for purpose. Nowhere is this clearer than in Stem education.
"Our report shows that whatever the socioeconomic background, from the age of three onwards, children are currently suffering from the levels of inequity in Stem education."
The report calls for more resources to strengthen the recruitment and retention of specialist Stem teachers in schools and colleges in disadvantaged areas of the country. "Addressing the current inequity in Stem education now will pay dividends, as the next generation go on to plug the current Stem skills gap, ensuring the UK continues to be a world leader in scientific and technological innovation," Onwurah said.
A separate report from the University of Oxford has warned that school exclusions in England, which have been increasing in recent years, could accelerate following lockdown as pupils who were already struggling with school are affected by heightened anxiety, bereavement, poverty and a disconnection from schooling.
Ian Thompson, associate professor of education at Oxford, said: "We know the impact of Covid-19 on schools is substantial for practitioners and students. The social and emotional disruption caused by the pandemic and the subsequent school closures is highly likely to have increased or exacerbated student anxiety and other mental health issues.
"There is also a concern with school connectedness for vulnerable students, whose patterns of school attendance have been disrupted. These concerns raise issues around transitions back to school settings."
The government has said it wants all pupils in England back in school full time at the start of the academic year. The education secretary, Gavin Williamson, told MPs in the Commons on Monday that he would unveil plans next week for the "full return of every single child" to school.
The government already has contingency plans in case of further disruption to education in September. It was announced that the Oak National Academy – a virtual school set up to to help teachers and offer online lessons during lockdown – is to stay open for another academic year, in case of local lockdowns and staff absences due to Covid.
Its principal, Matt Hood, said: "As we look ahead to September, we hope all teachers and pupils will be safely back at school. Given the risk of local lockdowns, it's sensible to have a backup plan available to any school, to make sure children can continue to receive an education. So we're keeping Oak National Academy open for another year."
A Department for Education spokeswoman said: "Our ambition is to make sure that everyone, regardless of their background, is able to fulfil their potential and gain the knowledge and skills they need to build a successful career.
"But we recognise there is more we can do to improve diversity in Stem, which is why we have taken a number of steps to boost inclusivity, such as establishing the Stem ambassadors programme, creating a network of maths hubs, and funding the simulating physics network to attract and hone top talent and improve gender participation in schools."