Health official defends discharging patients into English care homes
Advice in early April was that Covid-19 wasn't widespread, Chris Wormald tells MPs
Discharging patients into care homes in England in early April, when the number of coronavirus cases was rapidly increasing, was neither reckless nor wrong, the Department of Health and Social Care's most senior civil servant has claimed.
Faced with aggressive questioning from MPs on the powerful public accounts committee on Monday, Sir Chris Wormald, permanent secretary at the DHSC, said the guidance for discharge was correct based on the information available at the time.
Conservative MP Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown said to Wormald: "You were discharging them from hospital into care homes when care homes were already in dire trouble, some of the most vulnerable people in society, the testing wasn't available, PPE [personal protective equipment] wasn't available, the training wasn't available. Wasn't this a pretty reckless policy by the government?"
Wormald replied: "We don't believe that. Now, as Prof [Stephen] Powis [national medical director of NHS England] described, at this point Covid was not considered to be widespread in the community."
A clearly frustrated Clifton-Brown interrupted him saying there were already 1,000 care homes with coronavirus cases at the beginning of April. He also questioned why detailed advice in relation to coronavirus for the social care sector had not been issued until 15 April, almost a month after the equivalent information was provided to the NHS.
The Cotswolds MP suggested this was "to stop the NHS being overwhelmed and there wasn't the same degree of care … for the care homes, who had to deal with these patients".
Asked by Labour MP Nick Smith whether that guidance was "high-risk and wrong", Wormald replied: "I'm confident that based on the information we had at the time, our guidance was correct. That is not the same as saying we will do the same again …I'm not going to deny there were risks. All our guidance is very carefully considered based on the best clinical advice at the time."
Ministers have faced strong criticism from the care home sector over the decision to allow elderly residents to be discharged from hospital without being tested, as well as a legal challenge from the daughter of a man who died in a care home.
The National Audit Office confirmed earlier this month that 25,000 hospital patients were discharged to care homes in England at the height of the pandemic before testing became routine.
More than 16,000 people have died from Covid-19 in UK care homes, according to the latest official figures, almost a third of all fatalities.
It was only on 15 April, after the death toll peaked, that the government committed to testing all people being discharged from hospitals into care homes prior to admission.
Asked by another Conservative MP, Gagan Mohindra, whether there should have been a more joined-up approach between the NHS and care home sector, Wormald said: "We have taken a more national and more interventionist role in social care than we ever have before."
Also at the committee hearing, the chief executive of NHS England, Sir Simon Stevens, said that the deal with private hospitals for 8,000 beds, which is due to expire on 28 June, is likely to be extended for the "balance of the year". He said they had been used for "several hundred thousand" patient treatments to date. Stevens agreed to write to the committee with more specific details of the number of treatments and also the cost of the arrangement.