Concerns raised over proposed registration for England's drinkers and diners
Trade bodies say thought needs to be given to ways of encouraging people to provide details
Trade bodies representing pubs and restaurants have raised concerns about proposals that could force them to record the personal details of all customers coming in for a drink or a meal.
The idea, which may see drinkers and diners in England having to register in advance or as they enter a venue, prompted one leading organisation to say that a lot of thought would have to be given to how to "encourage" people to hand over their details. It has also sparked a debate about the potential cost implications of such a move, as well the fact that some venues will not be used to handling people's personal data.
Ministers have been considering asking customers in England to provide their contact details when they visit a pub, bar or restaurant under plans for reopening the hospitality sector that are due to be outlined on Tuesday.
Asked about this on Sophy Ridge on Sunday on Sky News, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, said: "I wouldn't rule that out. There are other countries in the world that take that approach."
Kate Nicholls, chief executive of UK Hospitality, which represents venues ranging from bars to nightclubs, said there was "a pressing need" to clarify the mechanics of how this might work: "Clearly, there are some key considerations about how to encourage guests to provide their data." However, she said that in many cases this information was captured at the point of booking and ahead of any visit.
She added: "Of course, as an industry, we stand ready to help our government to deliver an effective test, track and trace programme, to help the country emerge from lockdown and keep the infection rate low."
Michael Kill, chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, said that while many firms in the sector already had technology in place to record customer attendance, "The challenge remains for those businesses who don't already use these systems, and the additional cost implications during such a financially difficult period."
He added: "The bigger question is whether the use of these systems in support of track and trace would allow these businesses to operate at a greater capacity compared with the current guidance, while protecting the public."
The chief executive of one of Britain's biggest pub operators, Marstons, on Monday described the plan as "bonkers". Ralph Findlay, chief executive of the 1,400-pub chain, told the Daily Telegraph: "It's an infringement on people's liberties and it will be very difficult to practically manage. I don't understand why it would apply in pubs and restaurants and not every other single retail outlet across the country."