Netflix to resume filming of The Witcher after Covid-19 hiatus
Streaming platform plans to spend £400m to make more than 50 shows and films in UK
Netflix is to resume filming in the UK with fantasy epic The Witcher set to restart shooting on 17 August.
Netflix, which plans to spend in excess of £400m this year making more than 50 TV shows and films in the UK, shut down all filming in March as the coronavirus pandemic struck.
Netflix's Game of Thrones-style epic, which stars the Superman actor Henry Cavill, is one of the streaming service's biggest hits, with the first series watched by 76m households. The set of the show, which is filmed at Arborfield Studios, west of London, was given a deep clean when it was shut down after the actor Kristofer Hivju revealed he had tested positive for the coronavirus.
The streaming giant also had to shut down production on The Irregulars, a Sherlock Holmes spin-off filmed in Liverpool, and the family TV series Zero Chill, which is shot in Sheffield.
Last week, Universal was the first of the Hollywood studios to announce it would resume production in the UK on Jurassic World: Dominion on 6 July. The main cast, which includes Chris Pratt and Bryce Dallas Howard, flew to the UK last week to begin a two-week quarantine before restarting shooting at Pinewood Studios.
The set at Pinewood has been overhauled for shooting under coronavirus conditions including an onsite medical service called Your Doctor, 1,800 safety signs, 150 hand sanitiser stations, 60 sinks and a "greenzone" for the cast and crew featuring enhanced testing and safety.
ITV has already resumed filming of Coronation Street and Emmerdale, while the BBC plans to resume shooting EastEnders and Top Gear by the end of the month.
Last year, more than £3.6bn was spent making more than 300 films and high-end TV shows in the UK, such as His Dark Materials and The Crown, that cost at least £1m per episode. Netflix finished filming the latest series of The Crown, which is filmed at Elstree Studios, just before lockdown.