Stephen Timms: 'Universal credit's five-week delay is indefensible'
As work and pensions committee publishes new report, its chair says 'needlessly punitive' sanctions must be junked after lockdown
The coronavirus pandemic has shone a harsh spotlight on the UK's social security system. Lockdown, followed by an economic crash, has propelled more than 3 million new claimants on to universal credit, in three months, exposing the system's strengths – and its limitations – on a scale that has not been seen before.
Whether the system is comprehensive enough, and sufficiently flexible and generous enough to cope with that scrutiny and responsibility, is the subject of the first report of the new parliament published this week by the Commons work and pensions' select committee under its new chair, the Labour MP Stephen Timms.
The cross-party MPs' report is unanimous: for all the sterling efforts of the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) staff to keep universal credit up and running, millions of people have still struggled to get the support they needed to pay for essential living costs during the pandemic. "It's done a decent job," Timms says, "but universal credit is a very basic safety net."
Timms, the MP for East Ham, and a former social security minister in the Blair years, is no fan of either universal credit or the government's welfare policies, but he praises the DWP for its handling of the crisis so far, not least its "fleetness of foot" in rapidly reorganising itself to ensure money got to a large number of people in such a short period of time.
He salutes the government for uprating the value of universal credit by £20 a week and notes that the much-maligned computer system did not collapse. There was much that was impressive, he says. "It may well begin to rebuild public confidence in social security and a better understanding of why we need a social security system."
But not everyone has been able to get support during the crisis, notably migrant workers with leave to remain who are ineligible to claim benefits because they have no recourse to public funds (NRPF). Timms asked Boris Johnson about this in a memorable recent exchange at the commons liaison committee, when the PM appeared not to understand his own government's policy, blithely wondering why they could not apply for universal credit.
"I rather agree with the prime minister when he said hardworking families with no income should be entitled to support of one kind or another," says Timms. "What I want to see is the government following through on that view and delivering support by suspending NRPF at least to families with children for the duration of this crisis."
The report calls for immediate suspension of the NRPF rules for the duration of the pandemic. How can it be in the public interest for people – some of them health workers and retail staff – to be expected to comply with physical distancing and quarantine rules while denying them access to benefits, it asks.
Timms notes that other groups can feel ignored: people who have been refused universal credit on the basis that they had more than £16,000 of financial savings, for example. Some people on tax credits were wrongly advised to claim universal credit, were refused it because they had too much in savings, and then found they had been automatically – and irreversibly – cut off from tax credits, leaving them hundreds of pounds a month worse off.
Universal credit, he says, is plagued by "very, very serious flaws". Foremost among these is the "indefensible" five-week wait for payment. New claimants do not have the savings to wait that long without income, often running up rent arrears, debt, and becoming reliant on food banks.
The irony, says Timms, is that despite hundreds of millions of pounds of investment in digital technology, an initial benefit payment is now slower than at any point in the history of the welfare state. "Ever since the 1940s we have had a social security system that has been capable of delivering the first regular benefit payment to people within a few days … It seems to me this is not a system that is fit for purpose if it cannot do what the system has done ever since the 1940s."
The government's favoured solution to this has been to offer new claimants advance loans to tide them over the five weeks, repayable over 12 months. Timms says this simply stretches the financial shock of universal credit over a longer period. The committee has launched an inquiry looking at "technically feasible and financially affordable" alternatives to the five-week wait, including the idea that new claimants are given a non-repayable grant to smooth the transition.
No change is not an option, believes Timms. "When I was standing for chair of the select committee I made a lot of this problem with the five-week delay in universal credit and it was very striking how widely this was agreed on the Conservative benches as well on the Labour benches that this was a serious problems that need to be fixed."
One of the lessons DWP ministers might learn from the pandemic is how much of the architecture of the benefits system temporarily suspended during the pandemic might be permanently jettisoned, he says. He would not scrap conditionality, but the "needlessly punitive" sanctions regime – which penalises claimants for failing to carry out agreed tasks, such as job searches, by witholding their benefits for between four weeks and six months – should be looked at. One of the problems is that claimants feel the system is there to catch them out, rather than support them.
"That's a very poisonous relationship that people have sometimes got into with jobcentres. That not how it ought to be. The system should treat people a lot better than that. Sanctions are a reason why too many people have found it such an unpleasant experience."
Pre-pandemic concerns will not be forgotten by the committee as it starts its programme of inquiries. It will examine disability benefits, and the future of work. And while it is not a full inquiry – at least not yet – Timms says the committee will hold the DWP to account over the tragic death of Errol Graham, a mentally ill man who starved to death after his benefits were cut off.
Timms was shocked that the DWP has seemingly done so little to learn and change its policies despite the avoidable deaths by suicide of a number of vulnerable claimants like Graham over the years. "The committee will certainly not let this go," says Timms. "Everybody can see that the system failed terribly in this instance and other cases, and it needs to be put right."
Cases such as Graham's, and other well-publicised failures, have led some critics to attack the DWP as unfit for purpose. Timms is an optimist. The DWP may not be the "listening and learning" organisation of ministerial imagination ("I applaud the aspiration," he notes drily) but it has a vital role to play nonetheless. "I think social security is a very good thing and I am a firm believer in the potential of the department to change people's lives for the better. I want to see more of that potential realised."
Age: 65.
Lives: London.
Family: Married.
Education: Farnborough grammar school; Emmanuel College, Cambridge (mathematics).
Career: 1994-present: Labour MP for East Ham (previously Newham north-east); January 2020-present, chair, work and pensions select committee; 2012–present: chair, all party parliamentary group on faith and society; 2010-15: shadow employment minister; 2008–10: financial secretary, HM Treasury; 2007–08: competitiveness minister; 2005–06: pensions minister; 2006–07: chief secretary to HM Treasury; 2004–05: financial secretary, HM Treasury; 2002–04: minister for e-commerce and competitiveness, then for energy, e-commerce and postal services; 2001–02: school standards minister; 1999–2000: financial secretary, HM Treasury; 1999: pensions minister; 1990–94: leader, Newham borough council; 1984–94: Labour councillor, Newham borough council; 1994: manager, telecommunications reports, Ovum; 1986–94: principal consultant, Ovum; 1981–84: secretary, Newham NE Labour party; 1978–86: consultant, Logica.
Interests: Faith, rambling.
