What to expect from review into 2-metre physical distancing rule in England
What scientific advice has government had on minimising spread of coronavirus?
Matt Hancock, the health secretary, has said the government will announce the result of a review into the 2-metre physical distancing rule in England later this week. The review is expected to recommend a relaxing of the rule, which is deemed by some to be crucial to efforts to restart the economy.
Earlier this month, the government's Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) stressed the importance of physical distancing to prevent the spread of the virus. In situations where people would be face-to-face and less than 2 metres apart, the scientists said it was strongly recommended that protective measures be in place, including face coverings, and that efforts be made to minimise duration of exposure.
Not necessarily. Since the recommendation, the level of infections in the UK has continued to fall. Speaking last week, Catherine Noakes, a professor of environmental engineering for buildings at the University of Leeds and chair of the Sage Environmental Working Group, which recommended the 2-metre rule, said any measures needed to be proportionate. "If we had no virus and still said everyone has to stay 2 metres apart we'd be in a silly situation," she said. "Things will change based on the prevalence in the community and as we learn more about the virus." Noakes did not say whether she thought it was too soon to ease the rule at that point. This weekend, Prof Calum Semple, another Sage scientist, gave this view: "I'm still saying 2 metres is safer than one, but in my opinion it is now a reasonable political decision to relax these rules."
Not necessarily – and there is nothing magic about the 2-metre distance. The length of time, setting and activity are important too. Sage estimates that exposure to one cough at 2 metres has an equivalent risk to chatting with someone for a minute at 1 metre or for half an hour at 2 metres. Sitting quietly side-by-side is assumed to have a lower risk than a face-to-face conversation at the same distance. The risk at 1 metre has been estimated as 10 to 30 times higher than the risk at 2 metres. But the absolute risk – which is what really matters – is also dependent on levels of infection in the community and on whether any other protective measures are in place.
Face masks or coverings have been mandated in many other countries with less stringent physical distancing requirements and are already compulsory on public transport in England and Scotland. It is possible that a requirement or recommendation to wear face coverings in the UK could be extended to other settings, although it does not seem feasible to expect continual face mask use in pubs or restaurants. Requiring people who are not in the same household or social bubble to avoid spending extended periods face-to-face could also reduce the risk of being in closer proximity.
Ministers are reportedly considering asking diners and drinkers to register contact details as they enter a venue. New Zealand has used this approach, asking the public to scan codes into their phones when they visit an outlet so that if a new case subsequently emerges, anyone who has been at the same place can be easily traced. While this would not change the risk of transmission to an individual on a given day, rapidly containing new cases reduces the risk of an uptick of infections in the overall pandemic.