UK care homes may be forced to close unless councils release Covid-19 cash
The £3.2bn promised for frontline carers is not being passed on by local authorities struggling to fund their own services, sector leaders warn
Care homes are under severe financial strain because local authority red tape is denying them government bailout money, according to a leading social care organisation.
The National Care Forum, which represents non-profit care homes, said some members had not received any of the £3.2bn emergency funding that the government has promised social care since the pandemic began.
Some care providers are facing "layers of bureaucracy" before receiving payments, according to a letter from NCF executive director Vic Rayner to David Pearson, the chairman of the new national Covid-19 social care taskforce. The taskforce was set up to oversee distribution of support funds and met for the first time last week.
Care homes need to "have confidence that what they hear said at the Downing Street podium becomes swiftly a reality," Rayner wrote. "Unfortunately, the experience of our members is that this money is still not reliably and consistently reaching the frontline of care."
Although money has flowed from Whitehall to councils, many local authorities are in severe financial difficulties, and some in social care believe they have held on to the money to meet their own shortfalls.
Yet care homes and home care providers are in a worse position, having to pay for extra PPE, cleaning and more staff to cover Covid-19 sickness – a rise of about 40% in some cases, according to the UK Homecare Association.
At the same time, they have seen incomes drop by up to 15% because residents have died and new residents are not arriving. Some have already announced they will be forced to close, leaving their residents to find new homes.
On 13 May, Boris Johnson promised another £600m to pay for infection control, but some councils have added extra conditions before making payments, Rayner said.
"In just one example, the authority in question placed wide-ranging additional demands on providers to receive the funds, including taking part in antibody testing," she wrote. "This is no way to respond to a crisis. We need to see national and local leadership that cuts through the red tape and that puts aside the history and focuses on what needs to happen now to keep people safe."
But Rayner said councils were not to blame for failing to pass on the money. "This is absolutely not a blame game.
"We recognise the very significant financial pressures that local authorities are facing, and we need urgently to find a solution that doesn't put them in a position of having to make extraordinarily difficult choices which ultimately limit the distribution of the financial support that the government intended to reach the frontline of care."