South Asians in Britain most likely to die in hospital of Covid-19, study finds
Experts find diabetes is 'significant factor' in increased risk of ethnic group
People of south Asian heritage are the most likely in Great Britain to die after being admitted to hospital for Covid-19, the biggest study of its kind has found.
The research, which analysed data from 40% of all people admitted to hospital with Covid-19 in England, Scotland and Wales between 6 February and 8 May, concluded that people from a south Asian background had a mortality rate in hospital 20% higher than the white population.
The paper, which has yet to be peer reviewed, found that other ethnicities were not at greater risk than white people.
It said that increased prevalence of diabetes in the British south Asian population accounted for 18% of their increased mortality risk.
Prof Ewen Harrison, professor of surgery and data science and honorary consultant surgeon at the University of Edinburgh and the lead author of the study, said the remaining 82% of the increased risk was likely to be down to a combination of occupation, deprivation and biological factors.
"They are all potential explanations that do have implications for policy around shielding, around the easing of lockdown and around, for instance, the provision of any preventative treatment or vaccination that may become available in the future," he said.
"As a country we need to decide how to distribute those treatments as they become available … What this study does is it again squarely puts ethnicity in the centre of discussions around risk factors for Covid-19."
The researchers, from 27 institutions across Britain, assessed data from 35,000 patients from 260 hospitals. The higher risk of death in patients from a south Asian background was observed despite the fact they were 12 years younger on average than the white population (60 years old versus 72 years old). British south Asians, which encompasses mainly people of Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi heritage, were less likely to have non-asthmatic lung disease and obesity than the white population but more likely to have diabetes (40% versus 25%).
Prof Calum Semple, professor in child health and outbreak medicine at the University of Liverpool, and chief investigator on the report, said he believed occupation, which numerous studies on ethnicity and Covid-19 risk have been unable to take into account, was likely to be a significant factor.
"We fail to recognise the huge contribution that has been made by people from Asia to healthcare provision and public sector activity," he said. "And because the public sector activities are very human facing, when I say public-facing I mean really face-to-face interactions, I have a suspicion that that has led to exposure risk, which is much greater than other parts of society.
"So, for example, healthcare workers, in care homes, nurses, all the way up to ear, nose and throat surgeons and opticians, you do find that the Asian community makes a significantly greater contribution to these sectors of work."
Grouped together, patients from ethnic minority backgrounds were more likely to be admitted to critical care and to undergo ventilation than white people, despite there being no difference in disease severity at presentation at the hospital nor in duration of symptoms, and being substantially younger.
The researchers said the fact that white patients were older and more likely to have cardiac and respiratory disease might make them less likely to be considered able to benefit from critical care admission and ventilation, although the difference with ethnic minorities persisted after adjustment for such factors.
They concluded it "may reflect an increased severity of disease in multiple ethnic minority populations, but falling short of significantly increased mortality in many".
Several other studies, including by the Office for National Statistics, have found that black Britons, not just south Asians, are also at greater risk than the white population, and Harrison stressed that his and his colleagues' findings were not inconsistent with the previous research.
"It's still a likely possibility that there are more black people dying of coronavirus based on studies that have been done by others," he said.
"But what we're specifically looking at is those that are in hospital so it doesn't contradict Public Health England and ONS figures that look at the population as a whole … What it does is add important, quite in-depth information, not previously provided by studies, as to the characteristics of these groups after they get into hospital."