Black men in England three times more likely to die of Covid-19 than white men
ONS figures, which also cover Wales, show black males have highest Covid-19 mortality rate
Black men in England and Wales are three times more likely to die from Covid-19 than white men, the Office for National Statistics has found.
The study, which covered deaths in hospitals and in the community between 2 March and 15 May, found black men had the highest mortality rate from the disease. Among black men of all ages the death rate was 256 per 100,000 people, compared with 87 deaths per 100,000 for white men.
When comparing death rates for younger males between nine and 64 years of age, the discrepancy was even starker, with black males more than four times more likely to die than their white counterparts.
When researchers adjusted for population density, socio-demographic factors and region, they found black men were still twice as likely to die as white men, while for black women the risk was 1.4 times higher.
A delayed report into increased Covid-19 mortality among BAME people was published by Public Health England this week. The report found racism could have been a factor in high death rates among BAME people, who may be less likely to seek out hospital care or speak up when they have concerns about personal protective equipment (PPE) or increased risk.
The ONS analysis also found that Bangladeshi, Pakistani and Indian men had a higher chance of dying than white males.
Similar trends were seen among black and Asian women, although the difference in mortality rates between women of different ethnic groups was not as pronounced as among men. Black women were twice as likely to die from Covid-19 as white women, who had the lowest risk of dying.
The ONS also published research looking at death rates for religious groups. Combining data on Covid-19 death rates with demographic information from the census, it found that Muslims had the highest death rate of any religious group, with 199 deaths per 100,000 for men of all ages and 98 deaths per 100,000 for women.
Jewish men had the next highest death rate, with 188 deaths per 100,000 people. The lowest-risk group were those who reported "no religion" at the last census, with 81 deaths per 100,000 men and 48 deaths per 100,000 women.
Nick Stripe, the head of life events at the ONS, said: "For the most part the elevated risk of certain religious groups is explained by geographical, socioeconomic and demographic factors and increased risks associated with ethnicity.
"However, after adjusting for the above, Jewish males are at twice the risk of Christian males, and Jewish women are also at higher risk. Additional data and analyses are required to understand this excess risk."
Census data was also used to explore mortality rates among disabled people. The ONS found those who reported their daily activities were "limited a lot" by a disability at the 2011 census were about twice as likely to die as those who reported no disability, after adjusting for region and socio-demographic factors.