Which European countries are easing travel restrictions?
As some countries in Europe restart tourism, we round up lockdown-easing measures and restrictions country-by-country. Information will be updated as the situation changes
The UK Foreign Office (FCO) is currently advising against all but essential international travel for an indefinite period. However, countries across Europe have begun to ease lockdown measures and border restrictions, and some have started to welcome domestic and international tourists.
The European Commission advised EU internal borders to open from 15 June. It has recommended extended temporary restrictions on international tourists from the rest of the world entering EU countries until after 30 June. Belgium, Finland, France and Germany are among the countries that have opened borders to a wider number of European countries as of 15 June; several others opened to neighbouring nations earlier in the month.
At the UK border, all arrivals must self-isolate for 14 days from 8 June, or face a £1,000 fine. Arrivals must also provide contact and accommodation information, and the authorities have said they will carry out spot checks. Failure to supply an address may result in a £100 fine. They will also be strongly advised to download and use the NHS contact tracing app.
Currently, only passengers arriving from Ireland are exempt. Travel and hospitality companies and airlines are are calling for the scrapping of these quarantine measures, which they say will deter foreign visitors from coming here, deter UK visitors from travelling abroad and cause other countries to impose reciprocal quarantine requirements on Brits. They are instead urging the government to create "air bridges", allowing travel between the UK and countries where coronavirus has been controlled. A group of 500 travel companies has said it has had "government assurances" that these will be in place by the end of June, but there has been no public announcement as yet. Portugal's foreign minister, Augusto Santos Silva, has also said he is hopeful an air bridge between the UK and Portugal can be agreed by then.
Travel restrictions and safety measures are constantly changing and we will update this article as regularly as possible.
This article was first published on 18 May at 2pm. It was last updated on 22 June at 4.30pm BST
Land borders are open to international tourists, but commercial flights suspended. Domestic travel is also now permitted. Hotels, shops, restaurants, beaches, indoor activity centres for children, sports centres, swimming pools, internet cafes and cultural centres are permitted to open. Public transport may begin operating again gradually over the next month.
Borders are open to tourists from the EU, the Schengen zone and the UK. A health certificate is no longer required for arrivals from the EU, except for the UK, Sweden, Spain and Portugal, who are still required to present one on arrival, stating that they do not have coronavirus. Those without a certificate must self-isolate for 14 days. Testing is available at Vienna airport for €190. Transit is permitted without a certificate. Cross-border passenger trains are running limited services. Vienna, Innsbruck and Salzburg airports are operational but with limited services. Restaurants, bars and hotels are permitted to reopen. Masks are mandatory on public transport and in shops.
Borders are open to tourists from the EU, the Schengen zone and the UK. Some indirect flights with the UK are operating for essential travel. Eurostar has a reduced service; public transport is running (masks mandatory). Proof of residence and onward travel required for transit. Shops, museums, bars, restaurants and some tourist attractions are open, and small open-air events are permitted (major events prohibited until after August, alongside the opening of night clubs). Non-contact sports and religious gatherings under 100 people permitted. Cultural and sports events will be allowed a seated audience of up to 200 people from 1 July.
Borders are open to tourists from the UK, EU and Schengen countries. Currently, all arrivals must self-isolate for 14 days. A reduced number of direct flights are operating with the UK, and transit is permitted. Some hotels and swimming pools are open and individual outdoor sports permitted. Some markets and the outside areas of bars and restaurants are open. Visiting mountains and national parks is also allowed. Museums, galleries and cinemas are open at limited capacity. Masks mandatory on public transport and other enclosed public spaces.
Borders are open to tourists from the EU and EEA countries, including the UK. All arrivals should fill out a form online in advance and proof of a tourist accommodation booking is required on entry (apart from for tourists from Czech Republic, Hungary, Austria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovenia, Germany and Slovakia, who are exempt). Parks, beaches, shops, museums, hotels and outdoor restaurants and bars are open, and some public transport is operating. Some international and domestic flights operating and transit permitted. International flights will increase throughout June.
Borders are open to tourists from countries regarded as having dealt well with the pandemic (13 countries in category A face no restrictions; six in category B must provide a health certificate and negative test results on entry or pay for a test for €60). No date announced for borders reopening to non-essential travel by UK nationals. The government in Cyprus has said it will cover the cost of lodging, food, drink and medication for any traveller who tests positive while in Cyprus (they will need to pay for an airport transfer and repatriation flight). The second phase of easing, from 10 June, included reopening outside seating areas at cafes and restaurants and unrestricted use of beaches. Some hotels and museums are open. Parks, outdoor play areas, squares and marinas are to open from 21 June (for no more than 10 people at a time), as well as archaeological and historical sites.
Borders are open to tourists from the EU, the Schengen zone and the UK. However, countries will assessed weekly and categorised according to risk, and some will be subject to testing on arrival. The UK is considered a high risk country. Countries considered medium or high risk must present a negative test result, take a test with a negative result within 72 hours of arrival, or self-isolate for 14 days. Prague airport is open, with limited indirect flights to the UK, for essential travel only. Transit is permitted with proof of residence and onward travel. Domestic travel permitted. Shops, outdoor restaurants, pubs, museums and other cultural institutions are open, and events with up to 500 people are permitted. Hotels, outdoor campsites and other accommodation have also reopened. Rules on wearing masks in public have have also been relaxed, but they are still mandatory on public transport.
Borders open to tourists from Norway, Germany and Iceland, who must show proof of accommodation booking on arrival. From 27 June, Denmark is due to review the entry for the UK, EU and Schengen countries, depending on if the country has had fewer than 20 new infections per 100,000 inhabitants per week. Commercial passenger flights are operating, including with Greenland and the Faroe Islands to Copenhagen, where travellers can transit to the UK. Shops, parks and some hotels are open, and public transport is operating. Restaurants, bars, sports facilities, cinemas and theatres are also permitted to open.
Borders are open to tourists from the UK, EU and Schengen countries. Currently, arrivals from the UK, Sweden, Belgium, Ireland, Portugal, Malta and Spain must self-isolate for 14 days. The list will be revised every Friday, and will change depending on which countries have 15 or less people per 100,000 inhabitants infected with coronavirus (in the passenger's country of origin in the past 14 days). Domestic travel is permitted including to the islands. Hotels, museums, swimming pools and other leisure facilities are allowed to open. Restaurants and bars can be open until 10pm.
Borders are open to tourists from Norway, Denmark, Iceland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Tourists from other EU countries may be permitted after 14 July (the Finnish government is expected to review restrictions again in by the end of June). Some international flights are operating (arriving at Helsinki, Turku and Mariehamn airports), and transit is permitted. Shops and cultural institutions are to allowed to open, and restaurants and bars until 11pm. Hotels are beginning to reopen. Gatherings of up to 50 people permitted, and events of over 500 may be permitted in July.
Borders open to tourists from the UK, Schengen zone and EU countries. Currently, arrivals from the UK and Spain (by air until 21 June), must self-isolate for 14 days. Arrivals from outside of Europe must provide a health certificate stating that they do not have coronavirus until at least July (with an alternative of 14 days' self-isolation). Public transport is starting to run more frequently, masks are mandatory. Shops, restaurants, bars, museums, beaches and parks are permitted to reopen. P&amp;O and DFDS are operating reduced ferry services on cross-Channel routes. Some flights are operating. Eurostar is running a limited service between Paris and London (passengers are required to wear masks). For vehicle crossings, Eurotunnel Le Shuttle is operating a limited service.
Borders are open to tourists from the UK, Schengen zone and EU countries . Tourists from everywhere else are unlikely to be permitted until at least August. Flight schedules are due to increase over the next month. Domestic train schedules have resumed, as have some cross border routes. Shops, restaurants and some hotels now open. Large events, such as festivals may return after August. The 16 states have taken different paths out of lockdown, with types and timetable of amenities open varying.
Borders are open to international tourists: a list has been released of destinations deemed high risk, which currently includes thirteen UK airports. Passengers arriving from these countries face testing on arrival – a negative result will mean self-isolation for seven days; a positive will result in mandatory government quarantine for 14 days. Tourists from a list of countries deemed safe face random testing on arrival (including Albania, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Malta, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, North Macedonia, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea and Switzerland). Some domestic flights and ferries operating (at 50% capacity), and travel to all the Aegean and Ionian islands is permitted. Athens and Thessaloniki airports are open, but direct flights with the UK don't restart until 1 July. Masks are mandatory in shops and on public transport. Hotels, shops, bars and restaurants are open, and throughout June, malls, cinemas, amusement parks, playgrounds and sports facilities will open gradually. Public transport and taxis operating (up to two passengers per taxi). Large gatherings, including festivals and sporting events, are unlikely to return this summer.
Borders are open to tourists from Austria, Czech Republic, Croatia, Germany, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia and Slovenia. Limited flights are operating. In Budapest, shops, parks, bars and restaurants are open, and elsewhere hotels are also permitted to reopen. Masks are mandatory in shops and when using public transport and taxis across the entire country.
Borders are open to tourists from Schengen and EU countries, and the UK. All arrivals must choose between being tested for coronavirus or self-isolation for 14 days (children born 2005 or later are exempt). The test will be free charge for an initial two-week period, then ISK15,000 (£90). Arrivals are also likely to be asked to download the country's tracing app. Some flights are operating, including Icelandair, as are some buses and taxis. Most hotels, attractions, restaurants, nightclubs, gym and shops open; and public gatherings of up to 50 people permitted (with social distancing).
Some flights and ferry services continue to operate between Ireland and the UK. All arrivals are subject to 14 days' self-isolation and must provide details of accommodation while in Ireland. UK nationals will be exempt from self-isolation procedure on return home to the UK. Public transport is limited; restaurants and some pubs will reopen on 29 June; hotels, museums and galleries to reopen 20 July.
Borders are open to international tourists, but travellers from outside the EU, Schengen area and UK must self-isolate for 14 days. Bars, restaurants, non-essential shops, parks and museums are open. Some hotels have reopened. Many airports remain closed or are operating a reduced schedule; transit permitted. Trains are operating reduced services. Masks mandatory in enclosed public spaces. Sicily has announced that it will subsidise travel for international and domestic tourists once it is safe to return.
Borders are open to tourists from Switzerland, the EU and EEA countries, including the UK. However, all passengers will have to self isolate unless their country of origin has had 15 or less people per 100,000 inhabitants infected with coronavirus in the past 14 days. A list of high-risk and exempt countries will be updated every Friday. Commercial passenger flights are suspended.
Borders are open to tourists from Switzerland, the EU and EEA countries, including the UK. However, all passengers will have to self isolate unless their country of origin has had 25 or less people per 100,000 inhabitants infected with coronavirus in the past 14 days. A list of high-risk and exempt countries will be updated every Monday. These measures will be re-assessed by 16 June. Limited commercial passenger flights are operating. Masks are mandatory in shops, at events and on public transport. Gatherings of more than five people, or longer than for 15 minutes, are not permitted, but private and organised public events of up to 30 people are allowed. Hotels, restaurants, swimming pools, night clubs and arcades can reopen (until 10pm).
Borders open to tourists from Germany. No date announced for borders reopening to non-essential travel by UK nationals, or commercial passenger flights to start operating with the UK. Restaurants, shops and hotels are permitted to reopen and outdoor non-contact sports are also be permitted. Masks are mandatory in supermarkets and on public transport.
Borders are due to open to tourists from Austria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Norway, Sardinia, Sicily, Slovakia, Switzerland from 1 July, when airports also open. No date announced for borders reopening to non-essential travel by UK nationals or other tourists. Currently, all arrivals must self-isolate for 14 days (due to be relaxed 1 July for tourists from the countries listed above). Masks mandatory in shops and on public transport. Some restaurants and non-essential shops are open, along with some hotels.
Borders are open to tourists from EU and Schengen countries and the UK. Tourists from elsewhere may be permitted from 1 July. Currently travellers from high-risk countries must self-isolate for 14 days, including the UK. Proof of an accommodation booking is likely to be required on entry. Some flights are operating with the UK. Eurostar is due to operate with the UK from 28 June. Shops and some hotels are open. Masks are mandatory on public transport. Outdoor restaurants and bars are open, as are theatres, music venues, museums and cinemas (with social distancing). Campsites and holiday parks are open, and their communal facilities are due to open on 1 July. Events, concerts and festivals with more than 100 people may be allowed after 1 September.
Borders open to tourists from Denmark and Finland. No date announced for borders reopening to non-essential travel other tourists, although another announcement is expected by 20 July regarding entry for the remaining European countries. Some flights operating with the UK and transit permitted. Some hotels, shops and restaurants open. Organised events with up to 50 people permitted, so some parks, music venues, galleries and other cultural institutions open.
Borders are open to tourists from the EU. Some domestic flights are operating and international flights for essential travel, more commercial passenger flights are expected to resume from 16 July. Hotels and beaches are permitted to reopen, and most shops, restaurants, bars, museums, galleries and national parks are also open. City bike schemes and some public transport operating. Masks mandatory in public.
Borders are open to international tourists by air; the land border with Spain is closed until further notice. International airlines are gradually increasing schedules, including to the islands, and arrivals by air are subject to health checks but not a compulsory quarantine. On 3 June, foreign affairs Augusto Santos Silva told the BBC that he was hopeful an air bridge between the UK and Portugal could be agreed by the end of June. However, on 22 June, Portugal's prime minister, António Costa, said some coronavirus restrictions would be reimposed in Lisbon to help control outbreaks: from 23 June, there will be a restriction on gatherings of more than 10 people and orders for cafes and shops to close at 8pm in the capital. The Azores, Madeira and Porto Santo are open to tourists, who must fill out a form before travelling. They must also present negative test results from within 72 hours prior to departure; or be tested on arrival (paid for by the local government); or quarantine for 14 days. The Algarve and its hotels and beaches are also open to tourists. Public transport across the country is running at a reduced capacity, though there are rail and bus links to Lisbon city centre from most parts of the country, and taxis are still operating. Beaches and campsites are open and restaurants and bars in many regions are permitted to reopen at limited capacity.
Borders are open to tourists from the EU, Switzerland, and EEA countries, including the UK. Arrivals must self-isolate for 14 days apart from tourists from Austria, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Cyprus, Croatia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta, Norway, Slovakia, Slovenia and Switzerland, who are exempt. Commercial passenger flights are operating with these countries, but suspended from elsewhere. Domestic travel permitted. Hotels, open-air museums and attractions, and the outside of restaurants and bars are permitted to open. Masks mandatory in enclosed public spaces and on public transport. Gatherings of more than 3 people from different families are not allowed. Parks and beaches are open, and outdoor events, up to 500 attendees are allowed.
Borders open to tourists from EU and Schengen countries and the UK. All arrivals must register for entry 72 hours in advance. Arrivals must also provide a negetive test result on arrival (no older than 96 hours), or self-isolate for 14 days, unless they have spent the previous 14 days only in these 19 listed countries: Hungary, Austria, Czech Republic Germany, Lichtenstein, Switzerland, Slovenia, Croatia, Bulgaria, Greece, Cyprus, Malta, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Finland, Norway, Denmark and Iceland. Some flights operating, and transit permitted with proof of onward travel. Some shops, outdoor markets, outdoor sports venues for non-contact sports, outdoor tourist attractions, outdoor areas of bars and restaurants, museums, galleries and short and long-term accommodation are open. Taxis and some public transport operating. Masks in public are mandatory.
Borders are open to tourists from EU and Schengen countries and the UK. All arrivals must self-isolate for 14-days and provide proof of accommodation, apart from arrivals from Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Liechtenstein, Norway, Slovakia and Switzerland, who are exempt. Flights are limited and train connections with Austria are suspended. Shops, galleries, smaller hotels are open, and the outside areas of bars and restaurants. Nightclubs remain closed. Some public transport and taxis operating, and masks mandatory. Gatherings of up to 200 people are permitted in public spaces.
Borders are due to open to tourists from the UK, the EU and Schengen countries from 21 June (with the exception of Portugal on 1 July). Currently, arrivals must self-isolate for 14 days, although this is expected to be relaxed from 21 June. Potential self-isolation measures or an "air bridge", may be announced for UK tourists. Hotels, beaches, museums, bars and restaurants are open. Face masks are mandatory in public spaces. Airports are open but flight schedules are reduced; transit permitted. Inter-island travel is permitted, including in the Canaries and the Balearics. In partnership with the World Tourism Organization, the Canaries are also set to be the first destination in the world to trial digital health certificates  in July. A pilot scheme will welcome 10,900 German tourists to the Balearics in June.
Borders are open to tourists from EU and Schengen countries and the UK. Some European countries, including neighbouring Norway and Denmark are not permitting entry to people travelling from Sweden. Limited flights operating between London and Stockholm. As Sweden never went into full lockdown, hotels, shops, bars, restaurants and some museums are open. Large gatherings of more than 50 are still prohibited.
Borders are due to open to EU and EFTA countries and the UK. Travel from countries beyond this could resume from mid-July. Hotels, shops, markets and restaurants are open. Outdoor sports with up to five people permitted. Theatres, museums, cinemas, swimming pools, ski resorts, spas, mountain services and other leisure activities including summer camps have resumed business. Large events, up to 1000 people may resume from 24 June,and events larger than 1000 people may be possible at the end of August.
Borders are open to international tourists. Some international flights and domestic flights are now operating, including with the UK. Hotels and restaurants are permitted to open. Masks are mandatory in shops and on public transport, including on flights.