Non-essential shops in Wales can reopen from Monday
Devolved government says stores will be able to trade with physical distancing in place
All non-essential shops in Wales will be able to reopen from Monday so long as physical distancing can take place, as part of the devolved government's cautious easing of lockdown restrictions.
But the Labour-led administration is not expected to change its guidance that people should not travel more than five miles. The government will review the requirement to stay local by 6 July.
At the daily Welsh government press conference on Thursday, the health minister Vaughan Gething said he did not want to see a repeat of scenes in England where crowds of people were pictured standing close together outside stores when high streets reopened "in complete breach of what social distancing guidance is supposed to deliver. I don't want to see workers put at risk, I don't want to see shoppers put at risk."
Non-essential shops in England and Northern Ireland have reopened while the Scottish government announced on Thursday that all shops would be allowed to reopen from 29 June.
The approach from the Welsh government has been to announce one major change in each of the regular three-week review periods and then carefully study the impact.
Unlike in England, where shops have been trading since Monday, physical distancing is written into law in Wales, and compels all employers to make provisions for their workers to keep 2 metres apart.
There was mixed reaction to the news that shops will reopen. The Welsh Tories welcomed the reopening but expressed concern that the travel advice is not set to be changed.
Plaid Cymru's shadow health minister, Rhun ap Iorwerth, said although the announcement on shops was welcome, more clarity was needed on what else could be lifted in the months ahead.
He said: "I'm calling on the first minister to relax restrictions as fast and as safely as possible, and to consistently test and challenge the decisions they take as we move towards a new normality."
The Welsh secretary, Simon Hart, said the first minister, Mark Drakeford, needed to provide the tourism industry with "certainty and a plan" by giving a timetable when their businesses could resume. He said Drakeford had "spooked" the industry by saying tourism would be likely to be restricted to "self-contained accommodation" such as cottages and holiday homes until next year.
Meanwhile, staff at a chicken processing plant in north Wales have been asked to self-isolate for two weeks after 58 cases of coronavirus were confirmed.
Production was halted at the 2 Sisters factory in Llangefni, Anglesey, on Thursday after the Covid-19 outbreak was declared. Public Health Wales said testing of all staff was being arranged at three sites.