Ministers accused of 'betrayal' over NHS surcharge for migrants
Doctors say it is unacceptable that foreign-born health workers are still paying the fee
Doctors have accused ministers of "a crass betrayal" by not honouring Boris Johnson's pledge to scrap the £400-a-year fees foreign-born NHS staff have to pay for healthcare.
The Doctors' Association UK has written to Priti Patel, the home secretary, criticising the delay as "unacceptable".
The prime minister made the first major U-turn of his time in power on 21 May when he announced that health and care workers would no longer be forced to pay the immigration health surcharge.
Johnson abolished the charge after Conservative MPs told him the fees were "mean-spirited and immoral", given that migrant health staff already contribute to the NHS by working in it and paying tax.
He won widespread praise for the move, and has since stressed his commitment to implementing it.
But in the letter Dr Rinesh Parmar, the DAUK's chair, said: "Several weeks down the line we are deeply concerned that it seems that no progress has been made towards actually scrapping the charges. We have received scores of messages from doctors stating that the Home Office have advised that the charge is yet to be officially removed. This is frankly unacceptable.
"It shows a crass betrayal of thousands of migrant healthcare staff who have served this country during its time of desperate need."
In it he also urged Patel to exempt not just NHS and care staff from the charges but also their dependants. Currently migrants have to pay the £400-a-head annual fee for their spouses and children as well as themselves, which means some face bills of £3,000 to £6,000 as the fees have to be paid for three years in advance.
The day Johnson announced the fees were being scrapped Matt Hancock, the health and social care secretary, said he and Patel would outline what that would involve "in the next few days". However, neither has since given any details about whether, for example, abolition will also apply to dependants.
Hancock stressed the prime minister's appreciation of the NHS's large number of overseas-born personnel, especially after his spell in hospital with Covid-19, after which he singled out two nurses from New Zealand and Portugal for particular praise. "The prime minister has clearly himself been a beneficiary of carers from abroad and we have talked many times during this crisis about the enormous contribution people from overseas make to the NHS and social care," he said.
Key groups representing NHS doctors and nurses have been pressing Johnson to implement his promise and clarify as yet unanswered questions about the abolition.
The Guardian disclosed on Monday that the Home Office is still imposing the surcharge and collecting it from migrant doctors.
Last week the Royal College of Nursing, British Medical Association, Royal College of Physicians and Unison trade union wrote to Johnson asking him to ensure that the fees were ended permanently and that they would also be removed for spouses and dependants.
Hospital bosses are also keen to see the fees abolished. Some hospital trusts in England pay the surcharge for their staff as part of their contract of employment as a way of bolstering and maintaining their workforce.
The government said the DAUK's claims in its letter were misguided.
A government spokesperson said: "This is wrong. As the prime minister has said at prime minister's questions, officials are working as a matter of priority to implement an exemption from the immigration health surcharge for health and social care workers and those who have applied and paid since 21 May will be refunded.
"We are incredibly grateful for all the hard work that health and care workers continue to do in the fight against coronavirus."