Health experts criticise UK's failure to track recovered Covid-19 cases
Lack of monitoring means huge proportion of cases have remained invisible, say experts
The UK's failure to report how many people have recovered from Covid-19 has been criticised by public health experts, who say a huge proportion of cases have remained "invisible" to the health service.
Britain is an outlier internationally in not reporting the number of people who have recovered from Covid-19 alongside statistics on deaths and numbers of identified cases. Chile is the only other nation not to share this information out of the 25 countries with the highest reported incidence.
A failure to monitor those who test positive for Covid-19 outside of hospital has left people feeling unsupported and alienated from the health system, the experts say. There is concern that because the majority of community cases have not been logged in patient records, it will be more challenging to research the long-term consequences of the disease.
Prof Devi Sridhar, the chair of global public health at the University of Edinburgh, said: "Not tracking people in the community, for me, [is] so astonishing. These people are completely invisible in the health system."
In some countries, such as China, the policy has been to admit a large proportion of those who test positive to hospital and people have been recorded as "recovered" once discharged. Other countries have used community visits to assess recovery. In Germany, the number of people reported as recovered is an estimate based on case numbers – people are assumed to have got better two to three weeks after a positive test if they do not require further medical interventions. However, patients who have been diagnosed outside hospital in Germany have also been monitored through phone calls from health professionals.
In the UK, community tests have been mostly delivered by privately run facilities. In a large proportion of cases, results have not been shared with GPs or entered into patient records, meaning there is no obvious mechanism for monitoring people after a positive test or tracing long-term outcomes months or years into the future.
Sridhar said the lack of contact with the health system had left some, particularly those who continued to experience lingering symptoms for weeks or months after their initial illness, turning to Facebook groups and sites such as Reddit as alternative sources of information and support.
A particular concern, she said, had been the failure to record cases in children, who generally only experience very mild or no symptoms. It was important to track children to establish whether there were any long-term consequences for lung health, she said.
Allyson Pollock, the director of the Newcastle University Centre for Excellence in Regulatory Science, said the decision to allow patients to order their own tests was a mistake because a positive or negative result needed to be carefully interpreted in conjunction with clinical symptoms and explained to provide context about the possibility of false negative or false positive results.
"This idea that patients can just order tests for themselves is a nonsense," she said. "It should be done through a medical or trained health practitioner and all test results sent back to their GP.
"It's a sign of the government completely bypassing the established health system," she added. "We've lost a lot of vital information. It's bad for patient care and bad for understanding the epidemiology of the disease."