Contact tracers in England get no data from 26% of people with coronavirus
Data for 4 to 10 June shows contact tracers were unable to get details from 1,435 who tested positive
A quarter of people who tested positive for Covid-19 have not shared the phone numbers or email addresses for those they have met with contact tracers, in the second week of the scheme's operation, government figures show.
The data for 4 to 10 June shows that fewer people with positive tests – just under 6,000 – were transferred to the contact tracing call centre teams and 4,366 of those were actually reached and asked for details of people they had spent time with in the past two days.
That means that 73.4% of people with Covid-19 infection were reached – much the same proportion (72%) that the Department of Health and Social Care now says were reached in the first week, rather than two-thirds as it originally appeared in the first week of data, because some call centres succeeded in making contact late.
Critics will be concerned by the numbers who are not being reached – 1,435 people in week two – and also by the late contact. In the first week, the latest data shows 75% of people were contacted within 24 hours, which is the target, a further 13.6% within 48 hours, but 8.6% after 72 hours, when there is a high chance if they have been infected that they may have transmitted the virus to others.
Most of the people whose details were given to the contact tracers by people with Covid-19 were reached – 40,690 of close contacts (90.6%) were advised to self-isolate.
The government says that compares to 90.5% in the previous week – an increase from the 85% originally reported due to late contacting.
The shadow health minister, Justin Madders, said: "Expert opinion shows that to defeat this virus we need a fully functioning test-and-trace system, so these latest figures are hugely worrying.
"Having a quarter of those who test positive not contacted is a gaping hole in the system that urgently needs to be addressed. And questions still remain about how the app was hailed as a vital part of the system at the outset, but is now just the 'cherry on the cake'.
"Ministers need to level with the public about how they are going to tackle these real and serious issues as a matter of urgency."
Dido Harding, the executive chair of NHS Test and Trace, said the scheme was working to stop the spread of the virus "and undoubtedly helping to save lives".
"Building on our previous work, this week's data shows that tens of thousands more people who may have otherwise unwittingly spread the virus are now remaining safely at home," Lady Harding said.
"Our efforts continue to reach more people who may be at risk of passing the virus on, and I am grateful for the support the public has already shown to protect those around them. We continue to rely on everyone to play their part and we urge those with symptoms to book a test immediately, and those contacted by the NHS Test and Trace service to follow the advice they receive."