I'm a nurse in a deprived area of the UK. Here's the sinister truth about Covid and inequality
People praise me and my key worker neighbours for keeping things running before ranting about rule-breakers in ghettos
I'm a nurse in inner-city Birmingham. After my shifts, which have been long, hot and often harrowing, I return to the densely populated, working-class neighbourhood where I can afford to live. My street, which is about 500 metres long, contains more than 250 two- and three-bed Victorian terraces, many of which each contain an extended family, and there's a block of flats at one end. The quantity of parked cars makes the road single track and the pavement just over a metre wide. The road is a rat–run, and a railway bridge at one end makes visibility of upcoming traffic close to zero.
I use the term working class, with all its questionable connotations, pointedly, as we are the class who have disproportionately still been going out to work. So, at 5.30am, when we pour out of our houses to the hospitals, care homes, bus depots and grocery stores which pay our wages, it is no exaggeration to say there is not two metres of space to be had. Nor are there two metres in any hospital corridor or work changing room I have ever encountered.
So we smile. And we aim to be respectful. At our local supermarket, there is an orderly spaced queue for entry. Only two people go into each corner shop at a time. But these queues spill out on to the pavement, which, as I said, is only just over a metre wide.
The government advice is to "stay alert" and my friends who are furloughed or working from home seem to feel righteous in being on high alert every time they leave the house. My high alert is when I'm suctioning the airway of a patient with a rip-roaring Covid-19 pneumonia, my glasses have steamed up under my goggles and I can feel the sweat breaking the seal of my mask. This, of course, has been statistically proven to be a safe way to spend my days compared to many of my neighbours.
Security guards are many times more likely to die than the national average, with retail assistants and public transport workers not far behind. Not to mention the hushed tones talk of co-morbidities and black, Asian and minority ethnic communities as if these are random inexplicable quirks of the virus's predilections, instead of other widely recognised links to social deprivation. Whichever way you cut the numbers, more of us are out working and more of us will die.
This sudden, terrifying acceleration of the already marked health inequality that exists in Britain today would be galling enough if we were consistently greeted as heroes. But actually, the truth feels even more sinister. While we are raised on to fictional pedestals in our key worker professions, our neighbourhoods are being simultaneously vilified as places where people don't care about social distancing.
Photos of us filling the pavements to get to work in the morning, or sitting on our front walls to get some sunshine because no one has a garden, are plastered over social media to show how we ruin it for the rest of society. So some of my community who die will be hailed as martyrs, and others will be billed as if they brought it on themselves, when actually we're all doing the exact same thing: the very best we physically and emotionally can, knowing the odds are from all angles stacked against us.
I have never felt as disconnected from my friends from more affluent backgrounds. They are teaching themselves cross stitch, and posting Facebook videos of socially distanced street Zumba. And many have also transformed from left-wing, socially conscious humans into self-appointed social-distancing Stasi, without any recognition of the ludicrous level of privilege just having the time to worry about the actions of the masses entails. Or that when you live where we live, and have worked like we've worked, keeping two metres apart at all times really is a bit more complicated than that.
So, if you were banging your pans for all of us keeping your country running on a Thursday, and ranting about the rule-breakers in the ghettos on a Saturday, my advice is pick one stance, and pick wisely. Because we are not your heroes, nor your villains, and your insincerity is not lost on us.
If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series about experiences in healthcare during the coronavirus outbreak, get in touch by emailing sarah.johnson@theguardian.com