BAME care home residents in England more likely to die of Covid-19
Figures show 538 people from BAME backgrounds died from Covid-19 in care settings in one month
Black and Asian care home residents are more likely to die of Covid-19 than their white counterparts in England, according to official figures that will fuel concern about the unequal impacts of the pandemic.
Covid-19 was responsible for 54% of deaths among black people living in care homes compared with 44% among white people, according to data released by the Care Quality Commission following a request by the Guardian.
Asian people were also more vulnerable to dying from the disease in care homes, with 49% of deaths among that population caused by the coronavirus from 10 April to 15 May 2020.
Kate Terroni, the chief inspector of adult social care at CQC, said the figures showed a "disproportionate impact" on people from black and minority ethnic backgrounds and that urgent action was needed to fully understand the impact of Covid-19 on those people in adult social care settings.
"Everyone involved in adult social care needs to be alert to the increased risk to people from BME backgrounds from Covid-19 in care settings," she said. "Every part of the sector needs to work together to look at what is behind the numbers and really examine the care people receive and what can be done to improve this situation."
The figures align with studies by Public Health England and the Office for National Statistics that found people from minority ethnic communities had faced a higher risk of death from coronavirus overall than their white British counterparts.
Ethnic minorities have historically made up only about 3% of the care home population, but the figures show that 538 people from non-white backgrounds died from Covid-19 in care settings in just over a month to mid-May. CQC cautioned that ethnicity was provided by the care home and so may not have been as the deceased would have described it and that providing the data was not mandatory.
Higher death rates among ethnic minorities from Covid-19 have previously been attributed, in part, to an increased likelihood of underlying heart and kidney disease, diabetes and hypertension. But other factors may be involved, including, said one grieving relative, isolation.
Shirin Koohyar, who lost her Iran-born father, Ameer Koohyar, 91, to suspected Covid-19 in a care home in west London, said: "In certain cultures like mine, isolating elders from family is unheard of and abandonment of elderly by family is deadly.
"Right up to the covid visiting restrictions, I visited my father daily, so that he was not lonely, providing him with the larger part of his care," she said. "When this was most needed during a pandemic, it was taken away. I have no doubt that having to endure the severest form of isolation for weeks contributed to his untimely end. I feel these inhumane circumstances are a serious factor in the deaths of many others, in particular the elderly of minority cultures where contact with family is fundamental and a necessity for life."
The figures came as the regulator also revealed there had been a 55% increase in whistleblowing complaints from staff about care homes from the beginning of March to the end of May. A third of the 2,612 calls warned about infection control and social distancing, and a quarter about the lack of personal protective equipment.
The number of whistleblower complaints from care homes dwarfed the 118 complaints from people working in NHS acute hospitals over the same period.
CQC suspended routine inspections of care homes on 16 March and since then only 17 have been carried out, leading to calls from relatives for them to be urgently restarted.
"Staff have been going to extraordinary lengths to deliver good, safe care during this global crisis – if they are experiencing barriers to the delivery of that care, we want to hear from them and we are encouraged that so many staff have been brave enough to raise concerns with us," said Terroni.