Matt Hancock promises update on coronavirus shielding 'very soon'
Charities had called for clarity after confusion about when scheme in England would end
An announcement on a possible end to the coronavirus shielding programme in England will come "very soon", the UK health secretary, Matt Hancock, has said, after healthcare charities called for clarity on the government's plans.
The scheme affects roughly 2.2 million "clinically extremely vulnerable" people, a category that includes those who have had transplants, are having certain cancer treatments, have severe lung conditions or have immune systems that are particularly vulnerable to infection.
A report from the Health Service Journal (HSJ) cited sources "close to the issue" that said ministers were planning to tell this group they will no longer need to isolate at home from the end of July, when food and medicine deliveries for them would be ended.
After Downing Street said a final decision had not been made, a series of charities called for an end to confusion on the issue.
Asked about the plans, Hancock told the BBC Breakfast programme: "I want to say to your viewers, if you are in the shielded category we will announce very soon what the plans are and we will write to you personally through the NHS so that you can get the direct clinical advice."
Robert Jenrick, the communities secretary, would publish details soon, Hancock said, adding that the changes would be "based entirely on the clinical evidence" on what was safe for people to do.
Charities have expressed concern after the leaks about apparent plans. Caroline Abrahams, th charity director of Age UK, said: "We know that the last change in the guidance for this group caused some confusion, as well as a degree of scepticism, so it's beholden on the government to be very clear both in its rationale and its communications."
Gemma Peters, the chief executive of Blood Cancer UK, said: "The government needs to do a much better job than it has done so far to explain the rationale for its decisions on shielding, as well as to reassure people that it has plans for reintroducing it if the infection rate goes back up."
Nick Moberly, the chief executive of the MS Society, said: "We urgently need clarity around the guidance – including clear scientific evidence – so people can return to some sort of normal life safely."
Each expressed a concern that the vulnerable people to whom their charities provide help were worried about how the government's implementation of its plans would affect their possible return to work, as well as other issues.
Under lockdown advice, the extremely vulnerable people were initially told not to leave their home or garden at all, not even for exercise, shopping or to go to work. However, on 1 June, the rules in England were relaxed to say shielding people could leave their homes once a day for exercise and could meet one person from another household outdoors while maintaining physical distancing – ideally the same person each time.
Asked about the HSJ report, a government spokeswoman said: "We have always said we will be looking at making life easier for those having to shield, when it is safe to do so.
"We are considering the next steps for the shielding programme beyond the end of June, based on the latest medical and scientific advice. No final decision has yet been made and we will set out more detail shortly."