UK jobcentre claimants rise 126% to 2.8m since start of the lockdown
Analysts say year-on-year increase is most dramatic hit to UK labour market for 100 years
The number of people out of work and claiming work-related benefits in the UK jumped 23% to 2.8 million last month as the coronavirus crisis forced thousands of businesses to close.
Highlighting the impact of the pandemic on the workforce, the latest figures for May found that the number of jobcentre claimants increased from 1.24 million in March, representing a 126% increase since the beginning of the lockdown.
Data from the HMRC showed the impact of the pandemic on the number of people in employment in May following a fall of 2.1% or 612,000 on UK payrolls last month compared with March.
One group of analysts said the increase in claimants represented the most dramatic worsening of Britain's labour market for more than 100 years, beating the early period of the 1930s depression.
The year-on-year increase in claimant unemployment was the highest ever recorded, the Institute for Employment Studies said, and went beyond the 1 million increase in claimants seen in the first year following the 1929 Wall Street crash.
Tony Wilson, the institute's director, said: "If the public health crisis is just starting to ease, today's figures show that the unemployment crisis is only just beginning.
"There can be no doubt now that we are on course for claimant unemployment of 3 million by next month, and it may well reach the highest ever recorded."
Employment expert John Philpott, director of the Jobs Economist, described the data as like "watching the early part of a slow-motion video of a car crash when you already know the horrible outcome but have only witnessed the initial jolt".
The figures will put pressure on Rishi Sunak to provide further measures to prevent a rise in unemployment over the summer months.
The shadow chancellor, Anneliese Dodds, said in parliament that Sunak needed to move more quickly and announce measures directed at the worst hit industries to prevent a wave of job losses.
She demanded a summer budget targeted at support for young people.
"Will the government set out the back-to-work budget we need, with a focus on jobs?" she said.
The Office for National Statistics said its May claimant figures were included in the unemployment data to give a more up-to-date indication of the impact on jobs across the country.
Figures based on a standard measure of unemployment covering the three months from February to April also showed records being broken, though not at the rate revealed by the claimant data.
The ONS said the most striking fall was in the total number of hours worked on average each week, which slumped by a record 8.9% in the three months to April 2020.
Job vacancies also fell to their lowest level on record and inflation-adjusted pay declined for the first time in April since January 2018, the ONS said.
Real-term total pay including bonuses increased by just 0.7%, dragged down by a 1.7% fall in private sector pay. Public sector staff saw pay increase by 2.8%.
New government data also showed that 9.1 million workers have now been furloughed by 1.1 million employers, at a cost of £20.8bn to the Treasury.
Thousands of companies were forced to close down and mothball their businesses in March following the introduction of the lockdown, prompting the Treasury to agree to pay up to £2,500 a month towards the wages of workers who were sent home.
Changes to universal credit rules allow some workers to top up their wages with benefits, though anti-poverty campaigners argued that many people made redundant or suffering a big drop in hours are prevented from making a claim once their household income is taken into account.
Wilson said poorer areas were being hit hardest, with "coastal towns and ex-industrial areas seeing particularly big increases in unemployment".
Tej Parikh, chief economist at the Institute of Directors, said employers were expected to begin making thousands more people redundant as the furlough scheme was phased out between August and October.
"As many as a quarter of firms have said they will struggle to pay anything toward furloughed workers' pay come August. More bad news could be just round the corner, as redundancy consultation periods kick in."
He added that the government must act now to "slash the cost of employment".