Isle of Wight patient sent home on first day of Covid-19 lockdown almost died
Exclusive: hospital admits that man who spent weeks seeking urgent care was misdiagnosed
A patient almost died after being misdiagnosed and sent home from hospital on the first day of the lockdown as the NHS curtailed many normal services to focus on Covid-19.
The NHS trust involved has admitted that its failings led to the man suffering excruciating pain, developing life-threatening blood poisoning, and contracting the flesh-eating bug necrotising fasciitis. He needed eight operations to remedy the damage caused by his misdiagnosis.
The man, his wife and his GP spent three weeks after his discharge trying to get him urgent medical care. However, St Mary's hospital on the Isle of Wight rejected repeated pleas by them for doctors to help him, even though his health was deteriorating sharply.
The man, who does not want to be named, said his experience of seeking NHS care for something other than Covid-19 during the pandemic had been "debilitating and exhausting" and that feeling the NHS "was not there" for him had been "very distressing" for him and his wife.
Mary Smith, of the solicitors Novum Law, who are representing the man in his complaint against the trust, said his plight highlighted the growing number of cases that were emerging of people whose health had suffered because they could not access normal NHS care in recent months.
"It is evident in this case that something went badly wrong and our client was failed by the system. The NHS was designed to offer 'cradle to the grave' medical treatment for all, yet our client was not able to access urgent treatment when he needed it," said Smith.
The man's wife said: "Not only was my husband sent home when he shouldn't have been, but no matter how hard we tried, neither we, our GP or the paramedics could arrange for a hospital to take him.
"By the time an NHS 111 doctor insisted he go straight to the hospital he was so unwell [that] his life was in danger.
"If the hospital had got the diagnosis right in the first place, or not discharged him when they cleared the ward on the day of the lockdown, all this would never have happened."
Her husband was admitted to St Mary's on 22 March with pain in his abdomen and groin from a flare-up of an existing hernia problem. The next morning he was scanned but then sent home after doctors wrongly diagnosed his condition as having inflamed testicles. They told him to take antibiotics.
He said he was one of many patients who were also discharged that day.
In the following weeks St Mary's hospital had refused to readmit him, despite his symptoms worsening. The man's wife rang 10 private hospitals on the mainland but all had said they could not treat her husband as they had been taken over by the NHS as part of a deal to provide extra NHS care during the pandemic.
In desperation she rang 999 on 12 April. But staff at St Mary's told the ambulance crew not to bring him in and instead to tell him to ring NHS 111. He was finally readmitted later that day when the NHS 111 doctor who answered his call recognised how serious the situation was. He was then diagnosed as having appendicitis within his hernia, sepsis and necrotising fasciitis.
An inquiry by the trust found that "there was a missed diagnosis on 22 March". The patient had to spend three weeks in hospital after he was readmitted, but infection control procedures at St Mary's to reduce the spread of the coronavirus meant his wife was not allowed to visit.
In a letter to the patient acknowledging that mistakes were made, Isle of Wight NHS trust's chief executive, Maggie Oldham, apologised and said: "The trust accepts that had surgery on the right inguinal hernia been undertaken during the admission of 22 to 23 March 2020 the subsequent pain, sepsis and numerous returns to theatre would have been avoided."
A spokesperson for the Isle of Wight trust said: "We sincerely apologise for the experience that this person had in our care, following a misdiagnosis in March 2020 that resulted in the patient having to spend a long time in hospital during April and May. The changes to the hospital environment as a result of Covid-19 are in place to protect those in our care and we have not discharged patients early who require continued hospital treatment."
Peter Walsh, the chief executive of the patient safety charity Action against Medical Accidents (AvMA), said he believed that the trust was the first to admit that patients' health had suffered as a result of hospitals across the UK urgently reorganising services to prioritise the fight against Covid-19. The charity was now hearing of many similar cases.
NHS England, hospital bosses, health charities and AvMA are voicing increasing concern that some of the many millions of patients who have missed out on diagnosis or care during the pandemic, including those with cancer and heart problems, will experience health declines.
Niall Dickson, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents NHS providers of care, last week warned: "The virus has inflicted pain and suffering throughout the UK. But we also know the measures to combat it have come at a terrible cost to those who have not been able to access the care, treatment and support they need and to many whose conditions have gone undiagnosed."
The Guardian reported last week how Sherwin Hall, a 27-year-old delivery driver in Leeds, was fighting for his life after his cancer spread from his pelvis during March, April and May when he could not get a scan.
The leader of England's surgeons on Tuesday warned that it would be "four or five years" before the NHS could again give people non-urgent surgery within the target of 18 weeks. Prof Derek Alderson, the president of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, also told MPs on the Commons health and social care select committee that the NHS should continue using private hospitals to help tackle the big backlog of care that had built up because of the suspension of normal care.
If there was a second wave of Covid-19, patients needing cancer surgery, a cataract removal or hip or knee replacement could potentially have their operations in one of the Nightingale hospitals, which were built to help with the pandemic but quickly mothballed, he added.