Britons risk being shut out of Europe over quarantine and infection rate
Spain becomes latest country to say UK arrivals may face restrictions as continent reopens
Britain's inbound travel restrictions and high coronavirus infection rate mean that as Europe reopens for continental travellers, visitors from the UK risk being shut out, with Spain the latest country to say arrivals may face quarantine.
Spain's foreign minister, Arancha González Laya, said on Tuesday the country was considering a 14-day self-isolation requirement for all visitors from the UK when it reopens its borders to EU and Schengen area travellers on Sunday.
The measure was in response to Britain's decision to require all international arrivals to self-isolate for 14 days, González Laya said. "We will be checking what the UK will be doing … to see whether or not we should be introducing reciprocity," she said on the BBC's Hardtalk programme.
González Laya said Madrid was keen to "properly engage in a dialogue with the UK authorities to make sure that we both take the message that best corresponds to the health situation, which today is a little bit better in Spain than it is in the UK".
Spain's borders were due to reopen on 1 July but the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, said on Sunday that restrictions – including the current 14-day quarantine rule – would be lifted for EU and Schengen area arrivals from 21 June.
However, the number of new daily coronavirus infections is higher in Britain than in many European countries, prompting concerns in some nations about the risk of importing new cases but also frustration at the UK's quarantine rule, introduced on 8 June and due for review at the end of the month.
The situation is not helped by the British government's decision not to take part in an EU-led data-sharing project aimed at providing travellers with real-time information about coronavirus rules and the status of infections in each European country.
British holidaymakers in search of a continental break this summer face a confusing picture. While many countries partially reopened their borders this week, few have heeded the European commission's plea for a coordinated re-opening, instead imposing their own rules and timetables.
Spain this week welcomed nearly 200 German holidaymakers to Majorca, the first of nearly 11,000 expected in the Balearic islands over the next few weeks in a "safe corridors" pilot initiative aimed at testing social-distancing measures for tourists.
But multiple restrictions remain in place elsewhere, with several European countries seeking to regulate or exclude travel from territories where the infection rate is considered too high to be safe for leisure travel, such as the UK and Sweden.
At present, travellers from the UK face no restrictions on entering Belgium, Croatia, Germany, Italy and Switzerland, although they will be required to self-isolate for 14 days if they return to Britain within the next fortnight, and possibly thereafter.
Across the region, most countries are still barring travellers from outside the EU and Schengen zone. Restrictions for European travellers in some of the more popular European destinations currently look like this:
Austria: borders now open except for travellers from Portugal, Sweden, Spain and the UK who will have to self-isolate for two weeks or take a test before entry.
Belgium: no further restrictions on European travellers.
Croatia: arrivals from Austria, the Czech republic, Estonia, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia admitted freely. Other Europeans need to show a valid reason, but a hotel or apartment booking is considered enough.
Cyprus: from 20 June, travellers currently allowed in from 19 European countries with a negative test certificate (or prepared to self-isolate) may enter freely. Arrivals from Belgium, the Netherlands, Sweden and UK currently barred.
Czech republic: borders open from 15 June with low-risk European countries. Foreigners arriving from medium-risk (currently Belgium and the UK) and high-risk countries (Poland, Portugal, Sweden) need a negative test.
Denmark: border will stay closed until at least 1 September except for travellers from Germany, Norway and Iceland, who require a valid accommodation booking.
Finland: travellers allowed from Denmark, Iceland, Norway and the Baltic states; restrictions to remain for all other nations until 14 July.
France: borders open to travellers from the 31 EU and Schengen area states plus the UK since 15 June, but arrivals from Spain and the UK will be "invited" to observe 14 days of quarantine in the name of reciprocity.
Germany: all restrictions on European travellers lifted from 15 June.
Greece: from 15 June, travellers from airports listed a high risk by the EU aviation safety agency EASA, which currently includes some or all airports in Belgium, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and the UK, must undergo a test on arrival and submit to quarantine if it is positive.
Iceland: borders opened, including for travellers from the UK, on 15 June but all must be tested on arrival or go into 14-day quarantine.
Ireland: currently requires all arrivals (except from Northern Ireland) to self-isolated for 14 days.
Italy: borders opened on 3 June for travellers from the EU and Schengen area and the UK as long as they have not been outside the bloc in the previous two weeks.
Malta: borders will reopen to travellers from 17 countries, not including the UK, on 1 July. More countries to be announced in due course.
The Netherlands: EU and Schengen area travellers may now enter freely except for those from the UK and Sweden.
Norway: borders opened on 15 June but only to travellers from Denmark, Iceland and Finland. No further decisions are expected until 20 July.
Poland: borders open to EU travellers since 13 June.
Portugal: Air travel with European countries resumed on 15 June but the land border with Spain will remain closed until 1 July.
Spain: due to lift border restrictions for most EU and Schengen area countries – but possibly not the UK – from 21 June.
Sweden: No restrictions for travellers from the EU and Schengen area or the UK.
Switzerland: borders reopened on 15 June.