Homeless people mustn't be abandoned to life on the streets again
The policy of housing everyone during the pandemic is ending. Only emergency action will stop a rise in first-time rough sleepers
In the early days of the coronavirus pandemic, as we went into lockdown, something extraordinary happened.
Close on 15,000 people in England who had been sleeping on our streets or in crowded night shelters, often bedding down just inches from strangers, were provided with hotel rooms and other forms of emergency accommodation under the government's 'Everyone In' initiative. In a matter of days, streets like the Strand in London, where the sight of someone sleeping in a doorway had sadly become the norm, were close to empty.
This response, unprecedented in its scale and urgency, undoubtedly saved lives. It didn't just provide protection; it gave people an opportunity to engage with vital services, get their health back on track and access benefits, putting some on a path out of homelessness for good. We've seen people who have been sleeping rough for months, even years, access help for the first time.
But it hasn't just been about people who were visibly homeless before the outbreak. Coronavirus has exposed the true numbers of those "hidden homeless" who were sofa-surfing and dependent on the generosity of family and friends. When the lockdown was imposed, many such casual arrangements ended, leaving these people with no option but the street. Many of these people have received emergency hotel accommodation.
Recent statistics from the Greater London Authority show a 33% increase in the numbers of people rough sleeping in London between April and June this year, compared with the same period last year. Of the 4,227 individuals identified by outreach teams as sleeping on the streets of the capital, 63% – 2,680 – were sleeping rough for the first time. Compared with the same period last year, this was a 77% increase in the number of new rough sleepers.
While some are still reaping the benefits of Everyone In, the scheme itself has effectively ended. Councils are no longer being told by government that they must get everyone sleeping rough off the streets. This has led to a mixed – and worrying – picture nationwide.
In some places, local councils have taken the initiative and are still doing amazing work. Take Liverpool, for example. The Crisis team in the city worked closely with the city council, social housing providers and homelessness charities at the beginning of the Covid outbreak to provide places for over 200 people to stay.
Since then, the council has extended hotel contracts so that people continue to have somewhere to stay while they search for a permanent home. The council is also working with housing associations to ensure that those currently in hotels are prioritised when properties for social rent become available. Crisis is working closely with the council and partners to help people move to somewhere safe and settled.
However, elsewhere, councils have reapplied the legal barriers that were in place before the pandemic. People in need of help are being told they don't have the right immigration status, proof of local residency or sufficient vulnerability.
We're at a crucial point in time where we can either choose to rekindle the ambition of Everyone In and recognise that we can end homelessness for good; or return to a broken way of doing things and risk unravelling all the unprecedented progress that has been made.
On 23August, the ban on evictions in England will come to an end. That, compounded with the economic impact of the pandemic, particularly as the furlough scheme winds down, presents us with the grave prospect of a new wave of homelessness set to spread across the country.
When the political will is there, we know that tackling homelessness is possible – the response to the pandemic has proven just that. The government scheme was a success based on the simple idea that all rough sleepers should be helped. This principle is life-saving and is in stark contrast to the cruelty of the rationing that councils are once again being asked to perform in legally denying assistance to groups that do not qualify for help.
It is in the government's gift to end that cruelty. It must take urgent action and introduce emergency legislation to ensure that everyone who is sleeping rough or at risk can access homelessness support over the next 12 months – especially while this deadly virus is still out there.
Crisis has proposed legislation that would provide a clear framework for councils, guaranteeing all those experiencing homelessness with temporary accommodation, regardless of their immigration status and other legal barriers. It would lift the "no recourse to public funds" restrictions for people assisted via this legislation so that people can access benefits to help them find accommodation. It would also suspend the benefit cap and protect renters from eviction if they struggle to pay rent because of the financial impact of the pandemic.
People sleeping rough and living on our streets was part of the old normal. It doesn't have to be part of the new.
Matt Downie is director of policy and external affairs at Crisis