Allotments in a time of Covid: share your pictures and stories
Beans, berries or begonias? Tell us how your allotment has sustained you through the pandemic
Every year, we ask Guardian readers to share pictures of your allotments. This year, more than any other, those pictures will tell a story of how local allotments have provided not just food, but beauty: nurture for the soul during one of the UK's most difficult times.
For many people, the Covid-19 pandemic and the UK lockdown restrictions have highlighted the value of having a local growing space, as well as much-needed social contact – at a safe social distance, of course.
Whether growing fruit and vegetables for vital food supplies, flowers for beauty and pleasure, or being used for physical exercise and mental health benefits, these vital community spaces, usually run by local councils, are being treasured this year more than ever before.
To celebrate UK National Allotments Week, which runs from 10-16 August 2020, we are asking Guardian readers once again to share your pictures of allotments and the produce you've grown. Of course there have been challenges, including the early lockdown restrictions on movement, so let us know what's been tougher this year, too.
But like other years, we look forward to beautiful photos celebrating readers' hard work and community spirit on your allotments. Here's last year's gallery.
National Allotments Week began in 2002 as a way of raising awareness of allotments and the role they play in helping people to live healthier lifestyles, grow their own food, develop friendships and bolster communities.
You can share your photographs and stories and tell us about them by using the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions.
One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. We'll publish a gallery of some of our favourites and share your stories later in August.
If you're having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.