Parents, carers and disabled people in UK 'twice as likely to lose job'
One in four disabled people are currently facing redundancy, according to Citizens Advice report
Parents, carers, disabled people and those who previously shielded are at least twice as likely to face redundancy as the rest of the working population, according to research.
The report, An Unequal Crisis, found that one in four disabled people who are in work are currently facing redundancy. This rose to 37% of those who said their disability had a large impact on their day-to-day life.
The study of 6,000 workers by Citizens Advice also found that half of those shielding because of extreme vulnerability to the coronavirus were at risk of redundancy. Two in five parents or carers also face losing their jobs.
"Although the new research shows the risk of redundancy is widespread, with one in six (17%) of the working-age population facing redundancy, it indicated that those in more vulnerable circumstances are likely to bear the brunt," said Dame Gillian Guy, the chief executive of Citizens Advice.
Marston's - 2,150 jobs15 October: Marston's - the brewer which owns nearly 1,400 pubs, restaurants, cocktail bars and hotels across the UK - said it would cut 2,150 jobs due to fresh Covid restrictions. The company has more than 14,000 employees.
Whitbread - 6,000 jobs22 September: Whitbread, which owns the Premier Inn, Beefeater and Brewers Fayre chains, said it would cut 6,000 jobs at its hotels and restaurants, almost one in five of its workforce
Pizza Express – 1,100 jobs7 September: The restaurant chain confirms the closure of 73 restaurants as part of a rescue restructure deal.
Costa Coffee – 1,650 jobs3 September: The company, which was bought by Coca-Cola two years ago, is cutting up to 1,650 jobs in its cafes, more than one in 10 of its workforce. The assistant store manager role will go across all shops.
Pret a Manger – 2,890 jobs27 August: The majority of the cuts are focused on the sandwich chain's shop workers, but 90 roles will be lost in its support centre teams. The cuts include the 1,000 job losses announced on 6 July.
Marks &amp; Spencer – 7,000 jobs18 August: Food, clothing and homewares retailer cuts jobs in central support centre, regional management and stores.
M&amp;Co – 400 jobs5 August: M&amp;Co, the Renfrewshire-based clothing retailer, formerly known as Mackays, will close 47 of 215 stores.
WH Smith – 1,500 jobs5 August: The chain, which sells products ranging from sandwiches to stationery, will cut jobs mainly in UK railway stations and airports.
Dixons Carphone – 800 jobs4 August: Electronics retailer Dixons Carphone is cutting 800 managers in its stores as it continues to reduce costs.
DW Sports – 1,700 jobs at risk3 August: DW Sports fell into administration, closing its retail website immediately and risking the closure of its 150 gyms and shops.
Marks &amp; Spencer – 950 jobs20 July: The high street stalwart cuts management jobs in stores as well as head office roles related to property and store operations.
Ted Baker – 500 jobs19 July: About 200 roles to go at the fashion retailer's London headquarters, the Ugly Brown Building, and the remainder at stores.
Azzurri – 1,200 jobs17 July: The owner of the Ask Italian and Zizzi pizza chains closes 75 restaurants and makes its Pod lunch business delivery only
Burberry – 500 jobs worldwide15 July: Total includes 150 posts in UK head offices as luxury brand tries to slash costs by £55m after a slump in sales during the pandemic.
Boots – 4,000 jobs9 July: Boots iscutting 4,000 jobs– or 7% of its workforce – by closing 48 opticians outlets and reducing staff at its head office in Nottingham as well as some management and customer service roles in stores.
John Lewis – 1,300 jobs9 July: John Lewis announced that it is planning topermanently close eight of its 50 stores, including full department stores in Birmingham and Watford, with the likely loss of 1,300 jobs.
Celtic Manor – 450 jobs9 July: Bosses at the Celtic Collection in Newport, which staged golf's Ryder Cup in 2010 and the 2014 Nato Conference, said 450 of its 995 workers will lose their jobs.
Pret a Manger – 1,000 jobs6 July: Pret a Manger is topermanently close 30 branches and could cut at least 1,000 jobs after suffering "significant operating losses" as a result of the Covid-19 lockdown
Casual Dining Group – 1,900 jobs2 July: The owner of the Bella Italia, Café Rouge and Las Iguanas restaurant chainscollapsed into administration, with the immediate loss of 1,900 jobs. The company said multiple offers were on the table for parts of the business but buyers did not want to acquire all the existing sites and 91 of its 250 outlets would remain permanently closed.
Arcadia – 500 jobs1 July: Arcadia, Sir Philip Green's troubled fashion group – which owns Topshop, Miss Selfridge, Dorothy Perkins, Burton, Evans and Wallis – said in July 500 head office jobs out of 2,500 would go in the coming weeks.
SSP Group – 5,000 jobs1 July: The owner of Upper Crust and Caffè Ritazza is to axe 5,000 jobs, about half of its workforce, with cuts at its head office and across its UK operations after the pandemic stalled domestic and international travel.
Harrods – 700 jobs1 July: The department store group iscutting one in seven of its 4,800 employees because of the "ongoing impacts" of the pandemic.
Harveys – 240 jobs30 June: Administrators made240 redundancies at the furniture chain Harveys, with more than 1,300 jobs at risk if a buyer cannot be found.
TM Lewin – 600 jobs30 June: Shirtmaker TM Lewinclosed all 66 of its outlets permanently, with the loss of about 600 jobs.
Monsoon Accessorize – 545 jobs11 June: The fashion brands werebought out of administration by their founder, Peter Simon, in June, in a deal in which 35 stores closed permanently and 545 jobs were lost.
Mulberry – 470 jobs8 June: The luxury fashion and accessories brand is to cut 25% of its global workforce and has started a consultation with the 470 staff at risk.
The Restaurant Group – 3,000 jobs3 June: The owner of dining chains such as Wagamama and Frankie &amp; Benny's has closed most branches of Chiquito and all 11 of its Food &amp; Fuel pubs, with another 120 restaurants to close permanently. Total job losses could reach 3,000.
Clarks – 900 jobs21 May: Clarks plans tocut 900 office jobs worldwide as it grapples with the growth of online shoe shopping as well as the pandemic.
Oasis and Warehouse – 1,800 jobs30 April: The fashion brands were bought out of administration by the restructuring firm Hilco in April, withall of their stores permanently closed and 1,800 jobs lost.
Cath Kidston – 900 jobs21 April: More than 900 jobs were cut immediately at the retro retail label Cath Kidston after the company said it was permanently closing all 60 of its UK stores.
Debenhams – 4,000 jobs9 April: At least 4,000 jobs will be lost at Debenhams in its head office and closed stores after its collapse into administration in April, for the second time in a year.
Laura Ashley – 2,700 jobs17 March: Laura Ashley collapsed into administration, with 2,700 job losses, and said rescue talks had been thwarted by the pandemic.
Demand for help from Citizens Advice on redundancy selection has increased almost sevenfold since February. The charity's frontline advisers are currently dealing with a redundancy issue every two minutes.
"Employers face difficult choices but there are worrying signs that disabled workers, people who shielded, parents and carers are being pushed to the front of the queue when it comes to redundancy," said Guy.
"As tough as these times are, they cannot be used as an excuse to break the rules," she added. "If someone is facing an unfair redundancy, the odds of getting redress under the current system are stacked against them. Workers need a watchdog that will be a one-stop shop to protect their employment rights."
The charity also warned it was seeing troubling signs that workers' rights were being ignored during the redundancy process. "A large wave of redundancies is coming," said Guy. "But while workers have the right to a fair redundancy process, we are seeing troubling evidence that this is being ignored."
The charity, which said the findings could be the "tip of an iceberg", is retraining advisers on workers' rights in preparation for a wave of redundancies. Last week the National Institute of Economic and Social Research warned that closing the government furlough scheme could push unemployment to 10% this year.
Before the pandemic, retail worker Natalie had always been given shifts around her childcare. She was told she would be made redundant after returning from furlough because she was unable to work more flexible hours.
She told her employer this was unfair and was then asked to take a test along with other employees, after which she was made redundant.
She said: "I've been so worried that I could lose my house as I don't know how long it will be until I find another job. I've always worked and never been unemployed. This is quite a scary scenario. The thought of losing my home scares me. It would destroy me."
Jamie McGlynn, a contact centre anager at Citizens Advice Manchester, said: "People are absolutely racked with worry. One lady with underlying health conditions told her employer she felt unsafe about returning to work as another worker had Covid symptoms but wasn't isolating. The next week she had her redundancy notice through."
A spokesperson for the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said: "Redundancies which are based on unlawful discrimination are completely unacceptable. Legislation is in place to ensure processes are fair and reasonable, as well as being informed by appropriate equalities considerations.
"We urge employers to avoid cutting jobs where they can during this difficult period and to continue to access the job retention scheme where possible.
"Employees who believe their redundancy was unfair may be able to complain to an employment tribunal."