NHS appeals for urgent plasma donations from Covid-19 survivors
Blood plasma containing coronavirus antibodies may help patients in any second wave
People who have recovered from Covid-19 are being urged to donate their blood plasma as part of an urgent appeal to help the NHS treat those who fall ill during a potential second wave.
The call follows news that the number of appointments booked each week as part of the ongoing NHS Blood and Transplant (NHSBT) convalescent plasma collection has dropped by almost half in the past month. There are fewer eligible donors due to the fall in new infections during lockdown.
So far more than 13,000 donations have been made, but more are urgently required to help in the event of a second wave, Dr Gail Miflin, NHSBT's chief medical officer, said.
Men are especially being encouraged to come forward after analysis showed they produced more coronavirus antibodies than women, making them better plasma donors.
A major trial is looking at how convalescent plasma can be transfused into patients who are struggling to develop their own immune response.
Results from the trial into the safety and effectiveness of these transfusions are expected later this year. Donations are being collected in advance so that the NHS has a stock readily available.
The plasma contains neutralising antibodies which could stop the virus spreading. The donated plasma is frozen, and can be used up to three years later.
"We need people to offer to donate now so we are ready to potentially provide an additional line of protection during any second wave," Miflin said.
"The number of new infections has declined greatly, which is fantastic news. Fewer people are getting Covid-19.
"This does mean we need to work harder to recruit new donors and we urgently need as many people as possible who have recovered to donate, to help us make as much progress as possible now."
The comedian Hal Cruttenden, who has appeared on television shows including Have I Got News For You, The Great British Bake Off: An Extra Slice, and Live at the Apollo, has donated convalescent plasma twice after spending 10 days ill with the virus, and said it was a simple way to help.
"A lot of people feel powerless, and it's nice to be able to do something that other people can benefit from," he said. "And the truth is, it's an easy way to feel good about yourself because you are not doing anything too hard – plus they give you biscuits."
Malcolm Shaw, 72, England's oldest donor with high enough antibodies to take part in the trial, will donate for the fourth time on Monday. He spent eight days in hospital with the virus, having caught it at the beginning of April.
Shaw, who worked as a lead cancer nurse in Guernsey before retiring with his wife to Wirral, said: "To anyone, I would say if you feel able to donate, please do. It could really make a difference to someone's life. Donating is straightforward and you are sure to receive a warm welcome from the care team."
People can offer to donate by calling 0300 123 23 23 or visiting nhsbt.nhs.uk.