A 'pandemic pod' of friends sounds great – until you have to choose
Having a pod-friend sounds great – but the rules don't sound very fun and I worry it will leave me looking like a 'begfriend'
There is an English slang word, "begfriend," which means: a person who begs for friendship off, or brown noses someone. Begfriending (yes, it can be conjugated!) is what first sprung to my mind when the new policy of partnering up with another household – in "pods" – started gaining popularity across the world.
At first glance, having a pod-friend sounds great. The idea allows two households to mix during the pandemic, so long as they isolate contact to within that bubble in hopes of reducing the "most harmful social effects [of shutdown] to make the measures more sustainable".
But while I would love some new company, on closer inspection, pod partners sound suspiciously close to the old Myspace function that forced you to pick your top friends – and in short, I am worried it will leave me looking like an absolute begfriend.
Don't get me wrong, the harmful effects of isolation are certainly being felt in my household. In the months since shutdown started, my partner and I have argued over very important issues such as: him standing too close to me (to be fair, I was trying to cook, and the apartment is small); me breathing too loudly (while exercising); and then there was the time we practically almost broke up because I came back from a trip to the bakery empty-handed (the queue was too long), knowing full well that there are restrictions on how much we can go to the shops right now. We certainly need to introduce new people into our lives to keep our sanity.
But having just moved to New York in September, and having spent the first few months hastily asking strangers to hang out with me, the idea of now asking my new "friends" if we could be pod partners feels like social suicide, or at the very least an exercise in potential humiliation.
Even the fortunate people who have an abundance of very close friends must be concerned about how the friendship will survive months of pod-exclusive contact. There are guides for podding successfully – communicate clearly; set boundaries; understand everyone is a bit neurotic right now and so forth – but like reading a guide on how to get over a broken heart, these tips don't bring comfort. It's not that the rules don't sound sensible, they just don't sound very fun.
Take the recommendations to communicate properly, for example. That seems like a good idea if you're about to put your physical health in someone's hands, but having to disclose my recent mask-wearing history every time I talk to my buddy isn't exactly my idea of an invigorating relationship. Nor does it sound like a great tactic for keeping friends around for too long. And who even knows whether the gamble is worth it? My love for my friends is no guarantee that I won't expose them to the virus if I contract it after a supermarket spree.
And then there is the question of who I would even want to be around that much. What if your geographically close friends are tolerable, but you would rather not bear them for too long? Is it better to be entirely alone, or to spend isolation partnered up in a pod, suffering a fool? Some have recommended putting friends on trial periods, but it feels weird to manage a friendship in the same way you would a phone contract.
Like an open relationship, the idea of partnering up with a household in isolation sounds exhilarating, exciting, just like everything I've dreamed of these past two months. I just wonder whether it requires so many rules and regulations that it might be better left as a fantasy.