'No one should feel completely safe': what experts think of California's reopening plan
As businesses slowly reopen, experts warn that social distancing may need to be dialed back up: 'It's not an on-off switch'
Some California businesses on Friday began opening their doors for business – at least partially.
As states and counties across the nation contend with pressure to lift the stay-at-home measures that have destroyed local economies, California is taking an especially cautious approach, walking a fine line between political and economic pressure to reopen and the public health imperative to stop the spread of disease.
Public health experts told the Guardian that while no US state was equipped with enough coronavirus testing and surveillance to feel fully confident reopening, California's slow, piecemeal recovery plan – though far from perfect – seemed like the least risky option.
Seven weeks after the governor, Gavin Newsom, ordered his 40 million constituents to shelter in place and all non-essential businesses to close, California on Friday entered phase two of its grand reopening plan.
Some retail stores, including bookshops, florists, music stores, clothing and sporting goods retailers, can reopen if they organize curbside pickup. Some manufacturing and logistics in the retail supply chain can restart as well, as long as they follow safety and hygiene protocols. And local authorities are allowed to ease regulations further than the state guidelines if they meet certain testing and sanitation requirements.
Phase three of the plan – potentially months away – could see salons, gyms, movie theaters and in-person church services resume. Phase four would end all restrictions.
Friday's reopenings come as California has avoided the surge of infections states like New York have seen. And although California has seen more than 61,000 cases and 2,500 deaths, its hospitals have not been overwhelmed.
Last week, state officials reported the first week-over-week decline in Covid-19 deaths.
The new guidelines also follow small but sustained protests across the state to demand a relaxation of regulations to revive the state's crippled economy, and some rural counties have partially reopened in defiance of the lockdown measures.
However, California still hasn't seen the two weeks of declining cases that the White House suggested as a criterion for easing restrictions and that several European countries have used as a benchmark.
The state also lacks the robust testing and tracking systems that countries such as Germany and South Korea have used.
The state has ramped up its ability to administer and process tests, although for now, its rate of 29,414 tests a day is below the figure required by some analyses.
Authorities are working to put a robust contact tracing effort in place to make sure those who test positive get the care they need and are able to isolate themselves until they recover. Although some counties and communities have spearheaded community-wide testing and tracing programs, overall, the state isn't at the point where its system is as widespread or efficient as a country like Germany's.
Experts say California should also have a system in place to make sure vulnerable, unhoused populations have access to shelter and medical care – to prevent infection flare-ups in homeless shelters and encampments. Progress on those measures heavily varies county by county.
And ideally, there would be a treatment or a vaccine before reopening, said Dr Richard Jackson, a professor emeritus at the UCLA Fielding School of Public Health and the former head of the California department of public health. While we await a cure, Jackson cautioned, "no one should feel completely safe as we remove restrictions."
California's reopening strategy stands in sharp contrast to the approach of states like Georgia, which suddenly allowed gyms, barber shops, hair salons, tattoo parlors and bowling alleys to welcome customers last week.
"What certain places have done, where they've just thrown open the doors and said, 'OK, we don't have to keep our distance any more,' is a colossal mistake," Jackson said. Reopening businesses that put lots of people into close contact and speed the spread of disease will reverse the success of shelter-in-place rules, he noted, and overwhelm hospitals as cases surge. "Doing it very cautiously and carefully does make sense at this point in time," he said.
"I get that governors have to balance the public health goals with the economic goals," said Dr Robert Tsai, surgeon and health policy researcher at Brigham and Women's hospital in Boston and the Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health. "But this stage of the pandemic is really all about trade-offs," he noted.
In the coming weeks, state and local leaders will have to watch closely and prepare to dial the distancing back up if the number of cases surges, said Tsai.
"Social distancing isn't an on-off switch. What it needs to be is a dial, which can be turned up or down depending on what the data show on the ground in terms of how the Covid-19 epidemic is progressing.
"Reopening is going to be a very complicated process, and it should be complicated," he added. "Because this is about making sure that people don't end up in the hospital or dying."
That California's plan allows for counties to maintain stricter distancing guidelines or ease up measures could be both a strength and a liability.
The flexibility has allowed hotspots like the Bay Area and Los Angeles to take a more cautious approach, but it has also already caused confusion. In San Diego, where curbside shopping has already begun, business owners were unsure what, if anything, would change on Friday. In Bakersfield, restaurants allowed patrons to dine in on Monday and Tuesday, in defiance of the state's guidelines.
A hodgepodge reopening could cause surges in cases; Californians who travel between more lax and more strict counties could spread infections. Moreover, a rush to reopen fast in some areas could be counterproductive to economic recovery, said Alessandro Rebucci, an economist at the Johns Hopkins Carey School of Business.
"If you reopen when the pandemic is still out there, people and businesses will not just go back to normal," Rebucci noted. Based on research from China, it seems clear that fear of contracting the illness will keep businesses owners and patrons home until they feel it's safe enough, he said.