Birmingham medics investigate high BAME Covid-19 death rate
One Birmingham hospital saw BAME communities make up 64% of coronavirus deaths
Medics in one of the UK's most diverse cities are carrying out their own urgent investigation into how and why Covid-19 is disproportionately affecting black, Asian and minority ethnic people.
The government announced a similar nationwide inquiry last month but details remain sparse and the selection of some of those chosen to assist has proved controversial. Meanwhile, doctors at University hospitals Birmingham NHS trust – serving a city which has suffered more coronavirus deaths than any outside London – are pressing ahead with their own review.
Dr Adnan Sharif, a consultant nephrologist at Queen Elizabeth hospital, said: "Birmingham is a single local authority, over a million people on its books with a large, 42%, BAME community which has been impacted by Covid a lot, so it would be the best place to try to do this.
"I'm not entirely sure what the remit of the [national] inquiry is apart from being in the headlines. You can wait for a month or two before you have that properly defined but to be honest we're very eager to try to get as much information as quickly as possible."
Figures from another trust in the region show 64% of coronavirus deaths at Birmingham city hospital in March were from BAME communities, although it fell last month to 50%.
University hospitals Birmingham NHS trust, one of the biggest teaching trusts in the country, has recorded the highest number of Covid-19 deaths of any trust.
Sharif said the trust holds data about admissions, length of stay and mortality in its electronic system, which is being compiled by its informatics team but his hope is that it can be combined with data held by Birmingham city council to provide invaluable insight into what might be causing the disparities.
Cultural, genetic and socioeconomic factors have all been put forward as possible explanations and Sharif said he hopes the work in Birmingham will allow more investigation into the latter that might not be possible on a national scale.
"My personal hunch is that it's more social factors and that kind of data doesn't really exist in hospitals," he said. "But councils do have that data and I've made contact with Birmingham city council to see whether or not there's a possibility of trying to link what data they have on the people who live in Birmingham. So for example, how many occupants there are in the houses, benefit claimants, council tax band etc and all that kind of social level kind of data and trying to link it to Covid cases, hospital admissions. I think it's that kind of level of granular data that you need to get to from an epidemiological perspective to look at this."
Overcrowded accommodation, one element of social deprivation, has been cited as possible contributory factors to increased death rates among BAME people, as the bigger the household, the more the sources of possible exposure to coronavirus.
Nearly a third of the UK Bangladeshi population are considered to live in overcrowded housing, as well as 15% of people of a black African background and 16% of British Pakistanis, compared with 2% of the white British population.
Sharif said the response from the council had been encouraging and the public health department was looking into what it could provide.
"It's such a rapidly changing environment, it's difficult to really gauge reality and I think that's why everybody is just so keen to try to get as much information as possible," he said.