Wendy's pulls burgers off the menu at some locations due to meat shortage
As many as one in five restaurants in the fast-food chain have had to stop serving beef-based items amid pandemic
As many as one in five restaurants in the giant Wendy's fast-food chain across the US has had to stop serving hamburgers or other beef-based menu items, in the latest sign of an escalating threat of a national meat shortage caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
Wendy's customers in various US locations have reported being unable to purchase burgers at restaurants belonging to one of the world's largest hamburger chains. The fast-food company has confirmed it is experiencing problems with beef suppliers and that "some of our menu items may be temporarily limited at some restaurants in this current environment".
About 1,000 Wendy's restaurants, a fifth of the company's American outlets, are not serving burgers and other beef dishes, according to financial analyst firm Stephens. Some states are particularly affected, with restaurants in Ohio, Michigan and New York running extremely low on fresh meat, while other states such as Arizona and Nevada aren't as badly hit.
Wendy's meatless woes are a symptom of a broader slowdown in America's meat production as thousands of workers in processing plants fall sick from Covid-19 and facilities shutter due to fears of further spread of the virus.
Donald Trump attempted to rectify the situation by signing an executive order on 28 April that aims to keep meat-processing plants in operation. But the order is not expected to resolve the slowdown as it won't protect workers from a highly contagious disease spreading in the crowded environs of a processing facility.
Dozens of workers have already died from Covid-19, according to unions, with many employees expressing fear that they are on the frontline of a dangerous coronavirus hotspot.
Tyson Foods, one of America's largest meat producers, said its output of pork is down by 50% despite measures it claims it has taken to physically distance workers and ensure the supply of meat. The company recently took out a full-page advert in the New York Times to warn that the "food supply chain is breaking" due to a highly unusual situation where both the production and distribution of meat has been crippled by a public health emergency.
Over the past month, Tyson has closed three major plants in Iowa and one in Indiana after huge numbers of employees fell sick from Covid-19. Its beef-processing operations in Washington state and Nebraska have also shut down after a spate of infections.
A weekly report from the US Department of Agriculture on 27 April illustrated the national decline in meat output, with beef production down 25% on the same period last year, while pork production slumped 15%. This shortfall will lead to price increases in some restaurants and stores and shortages in others, analysts said.
"You're going to see empty shelves," Steve Meyer, an economist for agricultural risk management firm Kerns and Associates, told the Washington Post. "Not all the time, and it won't last forever."