Victoria battles to contain coronavirus in 35 aged care homes
All Covid-19 positive residents of Melbourne's Menarock aged care home transferred to hospital
All Covid-19-positive residents of Melbourne's most heavily infected aged care facility have been moved to hospital, as the state tackles 35 impacted aged care services.
Victorian chief health officer Brett Sutton confirmed on Tuesday that all infected residents of the Menarock Life Essendon aged care home had been moved out of the facility into hospital, as authorities battle to bring the large outbreak under control.
"It's a challenging situation with aged care. Sometimes those residents are looked after in place. If the isolation, single rooms, en suite bathrooms are available and those patients, residents, can be managed onsite, that's done," Sutton said.
"In other facilities, because there's a shared bathroom or difficulties in managing the movement of residents around the facility, they will be transferred, as has been the case with Menarock aged care."
On Tuesday the Menarock Essendon cluster grew to 28 cases. Sutton said on Monday this was split reasonably evenly between staff and residents. All other residents have been tested.
In previous large aged care clusters, such as at the Newmarch House aged care home in Sydney, both the government and aged care providers were criticised for infected residents being treated at the facility, with a number even dying inside the home.
But Sutton said not all infected residents in Melbourne will be moved.
"I don't think it's always the case that patients in aged care, residents who test positive, need to be transferred. Sometimes the safest place for them is to remain in that facility, but we'll always make a consideration and it will be a clinical judgment of the treating doctor for those patients," he said.
"Where we think there's a risk of transmission within that facility, we will make a strong recommendation for those patients to move out to an acute health setting but it's really done on a case-by-case basis."
He said that some hospitals were making preparations for an influx of infected aged care residents, with the Royal Melbourne setting up a specialty ward to treat them.
"All tertiary care hospitals will be looking at their surge, hospitals beds and intensive care capacity to manage that," he said.
Pat Sparrow, chief executive of Aged and Community Services Australia, which represents non-profit aged care homes told the ABC that all coronavirus-positive residents should be moved to hospital immediately.
"The Victorian government's position is 'assessment on a case-by-case basis'. Only the South Australian government has said they will automatically transfer patients who are positive into other settings," she said.
"That's something we're hoping to see other governments do."
Menarock Essendon is the largest aged care cluster in the state, followed closely by the Glendale Aged Care cluster in Werribee with at least 13 cases. The ABC has reported that 90-year-old resident of Glendale Aged Care, Alf Jordan, died after being diagnosed with Covid-19 on 10 July.
On Monday federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said Victoria now had at least 35 aged care facilities or at-home aged care services impacted.
It's unclear if all 35 facilities contain active cases. It is understood that a number of aged care clusters have involved only staff.
In recent weeks the department has confirmed cases among staff in the following facilities in Victoria:
BaptCare's The Orchards Community in Doncaster – 9 July
Benetas St George's in Altona Meadows – 9 July
BlueCross Ivanhoe – 9 July
Aurrum Aged Care facility in Healesville – 9 July
Holmwood Aged Care facility in Healesville – 9 July
Doutta Galla, Lynch's Bridge site in Kensington – 8 July
Uniting AgeWell facility in Preston – 8 July
Mercy Health at home aged care service – 8 July
Assisi Aged Care facility in Rosanna – 7 July
Not all staff were infectious during their time at the facility.
There were also cases detected among residents in the following facilities in recent weeks:
Japara Central Park Aged Care in Windsor – 13 July
Lifeview Willow Wood in Cranbourne – 20 June
Royal Freemasons Springtime in Sydenham- 20 June
Rosstown community aged care facility in Carnegie – 17 June
At least 10 hospitals or health care centres have also been impacted by small outbreaks.
On Monday Hunt mandated all aged care staff who work in residential facilities or provide home care support across Victoria's lockdown zones wear masks while on duty.
Sutton said 26 Victorians were now in intensive care, an increase of nine from Monday.
"[It's] a matter of the fact that we're going into a phase where a lot of our current cases will be deteriorating. Twenty-one of those patients are on ventilators," he said.
There are currently 81 patients in hospital, an increase of 13 since Monday.