Australia's mood darkens as coronavirus resurges, but this is not a normal political cycle
Approval ratings for the Victoria, NSW and federal governments have taken a hit in the latest Guardian Essential poll
The national mood is showing signs of darkening as we confront how devilishly difficult it will be to control a virulent, invisible virus while attempting to maintain something resembling a functioning economy.
Much like the coronavirus itself, a period of calm and stability over recent months has ended as this week's Guardian Essential report charts a sharp movement in attitudes towards the government response to the pandemic.
Since March government has become a team sport. The feds and the states working together, our institutions withstanding the initial shock and stabilising, largely constructive oppositions and a big tent for stakeholders all working in the national interest.
The lockdown came hard and fast, minus a few cruise ships our borders held, as we threw fiscal caution to the crisis and came together (at a safe and appropriate distance) to invest behind those in immediate need.
Despite the inconvenience, the polls showed we liked what we were doing, with overwhelming cross-partisan support for all governments, particularly when contrasted with other parts of the world.
This positive feedback in recent months has not been about any one individual's performance, it has been more an endorsement of our systemic response to crisis. For the first time in my two decades of political research, we have been referring to government as "we".
Yes, there were hard economic calls on the horizon: the future of jobkeeper, which is keeping thousand of zombie businesses afloat, the long-term rate of jobseeker, which had been doubled from a cruel $40 a day, the extent of and form of more required stimulus.
But these decisions were being worked through under the cover of feelgood self-affirmation that we had avoided the worst of the crisis by trusting in our institutions and now we just needed to take the same approach to economic renewal and the worst would be behind us.
True, we always suspected this was a best, best-case scenario. When asked a few weeks ago, 63% of respondents said they expected a second wave. And yet the resurgence of outbreaks in Melbourne and the almost inevitable flow-on into other states has still knocked the collective stuffing out of us.
First, our levels of concern about the virus have risen back to levels not seen since the early stages of the lockdown, with 36% of respondents now very concerned and 48% quite concerned.
That's a 10-point increase in concern over the past three weeks, suggesting the second lockdown has shaken us out of any complacency that we had weathered the storm and it was time to move on.
Unsurprisingly, the support for the performance of Victorian government has also taken a hit, not catastrophically, and still at a healthy 23% net positive, but significantly down from the heady net 68% net positive of April when the premier, Daniel Andrews, was going harder than any of his colleagues in restricting movement.
It's tempting to construct a partisan narrative around these numbers. Andrews has been challenged over his government's outsourcing and oversight of lax hotel security, while there has been an ongoing – if contradictory – attack from conservatives that "Dictator Dan" was overplaying the lockdowns.
But Victoria's is not the only government to see support for their response fall in this week's report. The NSW government's performance, which never reached the heights of its Victorian counterpart, has dropped seven points to 63%; while the levels of approval for the federal government is also down seven points to 64%.
I think we risk falling into the trap of looking at a particular government or a particular leader as if this was just another political cycle, or another crisis to be managed or another leader to be undermined and rolled.
The interplay between public approval and government response will be less transactional and more symbiotic as we live through this once-in-a-century moment that will challenge so much of what we have all built, of who we are and of what we believe as a nation.
Over the coming months, the virus will spread and likely mutate, some of us will get sick, we will all get tired and frustrated and disheartened as the lockdowns destroy industries and livelihoods. Like our leaders, we will need to keep our heads and think clearly about how we can all work together to find a way through.
Our governments will respond and sometimes succeed and sometimes fail and each time they do, we will learn a little more about ourselves and the sort of society we will need to create from the wreckage.
In due course, there will be elections where we will decide who we want to lead us forward, but those decisions will be less about what is happening now than about what should happen next.
And when we ask to judge our government's response, I think we will also be judging ourselves as much as them, whether together we have managed to find the way to weather this crisis and build something back at the other end.
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.