Casula Crossroads Hotel: thousands told to isolate as NSW records 14 new Covid-19 cases
NSW records 14 new Covid-19 cases, including eight linked to the Casula pub as 12 people from RAAF Wagga Wagga placed in isolation
There are now 13 cases linked to a coronavirus cluster at a Sydney hotel, with a dozen military personal awaiting test results and thousands of patrons are ordered to self-isolate.
Eight new cases linked to the Crossroads Hotel were announced on Monday, including four that were reported on Sunday. Of the eight new cases, five people attended the hotel and three are close contacts.
One of the cases is believed to be an 18-year-old pub worker who worked several shifts including 3 July. The other four cases are people who had dinner at the hotel on 3 July, including three Sydneysiders and one Victorian man.
"None of these cases appear likely to have been the source of infection at the hotel, which remains closed," a spokeswoman for the NSW department of health said.
One of the cases linked to the outbreak also attended the Picton Hotel during their infectious period. The spokeswoman said they visited the second hotel on 4, 9, and 10 July in the gaming room.
This hotel has now been closed for cleaning.
All patrons of the Casula pub who entered between 3 and 10 July have been told to self-isolate.
In total there were 14 new cases in NSW overnight, four were from hotel quarantine and the remaining two were NSW residents returning from Victoria. Both had been in isolation and have no close contacts north of the border.
Twelve military personal from the Royal Australian Air Force base in Wagga Wagga have also been tested and placed in isolation after visiting the pub "the day before they were to deploy on tasks related to Operation COVID-19 Assist," according to a defence force spokesperson.
A spokesman for the ADF said the members were travelling from Sydney to the Wagga Wagga base and had not begun their deployment when they were quarantined. He said the personal had not engaged in with the public in any official roles before they were asked to isolate.
The spokesperson said media reports that the base was placed in lockdown were false, but the "remainder of the contingent sent from Sydney have been directed to self-isolate" as a precaution. It's unclear how many people this includes.
Test results for the 12 members are still pending, however the ADF said there are currently no confirmed cases on the base.
Kidd said there was a risk of this cluster spreading across the country.
"Part of the concern is that this hotel is used by freight drivers who are transporting essential supplies across the country. So this is a really important issue for everyone across the country," he said.
"It is very important that anyone who was connected with that hotel does lock down."
An 18-year-old staffer and a close contact in her 50s, plus a woman in her 40s and a Victorian man in his 20s, who both dined at the Crossroads Hotel, were on Sunday revealed to have tested positive for Covid-19.
The NSW chief health Officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said the original case was unknown. "We do not think the staff member was the source," she told reporters on Sunday.
Five cases were previously linked to the pub – two people who visited on 3 July and three close contacts of one of those patrons.
Chant said all visitors and staff should be tested as a precaution and self-isolate for 14 days from their last visit. "A negative result does not mean you can breach self-isolation," she warned.
On Sunday night Casula's Planet Fitness gym confirmed on its Facebook page that a member had returned a positive test for coronavirus.
"The member has not been at the club since Friday 10 July, and is in quarantine," the gym's letter to members said, adding that staff were in self-quarantine and it was following NSW Department of Health advice. The gym has been closed and is being disinfected.
On Sunday the premier, Gladys Berejiklian, announced that NSW will begin charging international arrivals for their mandatory two-week hotel quarantine.
From Saturday, for all arrivals on tickets bought from midnight Monday, the first adult in each party will be charged $3,000.
Subsequent adults will be billed $1,000 and children $500, but those under three will be free. Some people will be exempt.
Berejiklian said the state was on high alert for community transmission.
"I get extremely concerned and upset when we see people flouting the rules that are in place because that will take us down the path of Victoria," she said. "If you wake up with a scratchy throat, don't go to work. Get tested and stay home."
The pub outbreak highlighted the importance of businesses recording contact details for every sit-down customer and the public taking the measures seriously, Chant said.
"When you do go into cafes, restaurants and other facilities, there is a reason we ask you for those details," the state's top doctor said. "Please use correct numbers [and] write legibly because this will be in your best interest."
On Sunday evening the Queensland deputy premier and minister for health, Steven Miles, urged Queenslanders who had attended the pub to also self-isolate and get tested.
"Any Queenslanders who have been to the Crossroads Hotel from July 3 to July 10 inclusive should get Covid-19 tested as soon as possible and then immediately self-isolate," Miles said.
"The hotel is a busy stopover for many travellers, so it is very likely that there are a number of Queenslanders who have been there during this period."