Coronavirus Victoria: locked-down Melbourne residents urged to wear face masks outside home amid 288 new cases
Premier issues call for first time while warning case numbers will likely rise in next few days
Victoria has recorded 288 new coronavirus cases, a "pretty ugly" number that is the highest daily total of any state during the entire pandemic.
For the first time, the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, urged residents of locked-down Melbourne to wear masks if they had to leave their homes and could not stay 1.5 metres away from others.
Andrews acknowledged that the significant rise in the number of cases would cause concern across the community, and warned that numbers would probably increase over the next few days.
"It was always going to get worse before it got better," Andrews said at a press conference on Friday.
Victoria's chief health officer, Brett Sutton, acknowledged it was a "pretty ugly" number but said he expected the number of cases to plateau soon.
Andrews said Victorians should be comforted by the fact that the state had carried out more than 37,000 Covid-19 tests in the past day, which was the "single biggest day of testing … by some considerable margin".
Twenty-six of the new cases are linked to known outbreaks, and 262 are still under investigation.
Andrews also said his government would request that Melbourne residents wear a mask when proper social distancing was not possible, such as in a taxi or a busy supermarket. Wearing a mask would not be compulsory, Andrews said, but he was making the request "through an abundance of caution" and because it was relatively easy.
The government was preparing instructions on making home-made masks, Andrews said, and was also getting 2m reusable masks made.
The government had previously not issued instructions on masks because the evidence was "ambivalent", Sutton said. However, a recent meta-analysis in the journal Lancet had shown that masks could make a significant difference, he said.
Andrews urged Melbourne residents to adhere to lockdown rules, cautioning that the six-week lockdown could be extended if people broke the rules.
The police commissioner, Shane Patton, called out rule-breakers, including attendees of a birthday party of almost 20 people in Dandenong who were caught after ambulance staff saw people ordering "20-odd" meals at KFC at 1.30am.
Four sex workers were also fined for breaking the rules in Glen Waverley, Patton said.
He warned that police enforcement was ramping up. "Every police vehicle is involved in Covid-19 enforcement."
Victoria currently has 3,379 current coronavirus cases. Of those, 47 are in hospital. Twelve patients are in intensive care.
Meanwhile, the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard. has warned that his state is on "extremely high alert" for a second wave spreading out of Victoria and urged any Victorians who had recently arrived to go home as soon as they could.
Speaking at a press conference on Friday, Hazzard revealed the "troubling" case of a man in his 20s who tested positive to Covid-19 after driving a caravan up from Victoria to Sydney's Sutherland area in the past few days. He thanked the man for coming forward and urged other recent arrivals to be on high alert.
"I would ask you at this point to consider packing up your caravan, packing up your tent, or whatever else you've got, and heading home to Victoria," Hazzard said. "Please go home as soon as is reasonably practicable ... Go back to Victoria and go back to your area and comply with your own government's laws."
Hazzard also highlighted the case of a man and a woman who were not known to each other but both tested positive in recent days after visiting the Crossroads Hotel on Casula on Saturday night. Hazzard and the NSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, suggested they had both likely contracted the virus from a third party and that work was underway to find the source. A pop-up testing clinic will be set up in the pub's car park.
Fourteen new cases were recorded in NSW in the 24 hours to 8pm Thursday.