Queensland border reopens after coronavirus closure but travellers stuck in traffic jams
Travellers from Covid-19 hit Victoria banned as Qld police warn of traffic queues up to 20km long at crossing locations
Travellers heading to Queensland are stuck in traffic jams for kilometres as the state reopens to everyone but those coming from Victoria.
Traffic was almost at a standstill for about six kilometres on the M1 heading towards the Queensland border, said Chris Hull from the Australian Traffic Network. It was also backed up for about two kilometres on the Gold Coast Highway.
There was an inland build-up of traffic on the New England Highway heading towards Queensland and near the border town of Goondiwindi, Hull said.
Police told travellers to pack food and water, and that traffic could bank up for 20km at major checkpoints.
Almost 314,000 people have downloaded passes to pour into Queensland now that borders are open.
The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said the ban on people travelling from coronavirus-hit Victoria, unless they could prove they had spent two weeks elsewhere before trying to enter Queensland, was indefinite.
"As long as it takes," she told Nine's Today program on Friday, when asked how long Victoria would remain on Queensland's banned list. "I hate to say that, but it's as long as it takes until the community transmission there is under control."
Police told travellers making a beeline for the border to expect major delays over the next 72 hours.
"We anticipate extensive delays at the major checkpoints," Tweed Byron police commander Superintendent Dave Roptell told the Gold Coast Bulletin. "These delays could be more than a couple of hours, with queues potentially up to 20km long."
NSW school holiday-makers were expected to form a large part of the influx of tourists.
Some northern and western NSW towns reported logjams of caravaners waiting for Queensland's border to open.
The money the visitors spend will be welcome relief for tourism operators and the hospitality sector, which have suffered huge economic losses during the 15-week border lockdown.
Domestic tourism has picked up in the past week, Griffith St Larder owner Kylie Bastos said, but venues were ready for what they hoped would be a massive weekend trade.
"For us to be able to have our local base come back easily would be a real pleasure," she said. "It's been really tough. I have staff that live across the border and half of our customer base lives across the border so it has majorly affected us.
"To be able to have some tourism for the last week of the school holidays will be fantastic."
Queensland's airports were also preparing for an influx of arrivals.
Some flights had been delayed to help avoid passenger traffic jams.
Virgin Australia launched a major sale, offering more than half a million discount fares to Queensland destinations including Brisbane, Cairns, the Gold Coast, Hamilton Island and Townsville.
All arrivals into Queensland must hold a valid border pass, including residents returning to their home state.
Queensland has only two active coronavirus cases and there's no evidence of community transition, the state's chief health officer, Jeannette Young, said on Friday.
"I think we all need to commit that if any of us get any symptoms that we just immediately get tested, do our best to maintain social distancing and that at this point in time, that we don't go down to Victoria or overseas," she told ABC radio.
Victoria has more than 3,000 cases, after days of triple-digit increases.