Everything we know about Melbourne's Covid-19 clusters
Melbourne is undergoing a suburban testing blitz after Victorian premier Daniel Andrews revealed hotspots in suburbs were largely caused by extended families
As of midnight on Wednesday 8 July, metropolitan Melbourne and the regional shire of Mitchell will re-enter stage three lockdowns as the city grapples with serious community spread of coronavirus.
Part of this spread includes large clusters across the city.
The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has said the outbreaks were largely caused by gatherings of extended families stretching out across multiple households and suburbs, as well as school communities and failures in hotel quarantine management.
But what exactly do we know about these complex, interconnected clusters? How large are they, when did they start and how do they relate to each other?
While a large amount of information is protected by the government for privacy reasons, we have tried to break down everything we know about every Melbourne cluster, as of Tuesday 7 July.
Area: Melbourne, Flemington – City of Melbourne and Moonee Valley local government areas
Cluster declared: 4 July
Current size: 69
What we know: This is easily the most controversial cluster in Melbourne, with the government imposing a "hard lockdown" on nine government housing towers in the city's inner north and west – despite there not being a confirmed case in every building.
The nearly 3,000 residents inside the buildings are not allowed to leave the towers for any reason besides urgent medical care. They are meant to stay inside their units inside the towers at all times. It was originally announced that this lockdown would last five days but a legal document given to residents appeared to imply it would last two weeks.
The premier has since clarified that after all testing is carried out and positive cases and close contacts have been isolated the wider tower population will be allowed to return to the softer stage three lockdowns that are imposed on the rest of the city.
Area: Truganina – Melton and Wyndham LGAs
Cluster declared: 29 June
Current size: 90
What we know: This cluster has grown to be the second biggest in Victoria, with what appears to be significant student-to-student transmission.
The chief health officer has suggested that senior students with a transmission rate closer to that of adults had spread the virus around the school. He suggested that older students may not have been practising proper social distancing.
On 3 July the health department ordered that all staff and students isolate for two weeks and get tested. After this testing blitz, case numbers at the school jumped significantly.
The outbreak is believed to have links to family clusters in Truganina and Sunshine West.
Area: Epping – Whittlesea LGA
Cluster declared: 3 July
Current size: nine
What we know: All that is known is that at least eight healthcare workers and one close contact associated with the emergency department have tested positive to Covid-19.
Contact tracing of staff and patients is under way and all emergency department staff will be tested as a precaution.
The department said the two workers originally diagnosed had worn appropriate personal protective equipment while treating patients.
Area: Melbourne, Hallam – City of Melbourne and Casey LGAs
Cluster declared: 15 June (Monash Health/Hallam), 17 June (Stamford Plaza)
Current size: eight (Monash Health/Hallam), 42 (Stamford Plaza)
What we know: When combined, these two interconnected clusters account for one of the largest outbreaks in the state, with 27 cases, but officially they are considered separate by the health department.
The Monash Health outbreak, later known as the Hallam family outbreak, was announced when a patient at Monash Health was linked to two more cases, a household contact and a healthcare worker.
By 17 June it was considered to be primarily family-based rather than connected to the clinic.
The same day a worker tested positive at the Stamford Plaza Hotel, which was being used for returned traveller quarantine. This cluster quickly grew and on 19 June it was suggested that one infected security contractor was actually a household contact of the Hallam family.
Victoria's chief health officer, Brett Sutton, has since confirmed that it was this worker, who was infected at the hotel, who brought the virus to their family and started Hallam outbreak.
It has been suggested by the premier that a large number of Melbourne's cases can be linked back to hotel quarantine breaches by genomic testing, but the total is unknown.
Area: Darebin LGA
Cluster declared: 18 June
Current size: at least 30
What we know: While this cluster began as a workplace outbreak, on 25 June it was reclassified by the health department as a family cluster in the suburb of North Melbourne.
The first person diagnosed was a staff member at the H&amp;M store who also attend the Black Lives Matter protest on 6 June, but was not considered to be infectious at the time. Two days later a second staff member contracted the virus. They also attended the protest but are believed to have been infected at the store.
By 26 June the cluster had grown to 15, the majority household contacts of a staff member.
While some reports have suggested that the "North Melbourne" in the cluster's name refers to the region of "northern Melbourne", the DHHS has twice confirmed to Guardian Australia that the name does, in fact, refers to the suburb of "North Melbourne". This does not mean that all, or even most, associated clusters are located within that suburb.
On 25 June a new "Brimbank Family" cluster was declared, which grew to six cases over the next few days. On 29 June the health minister said a link had been found between this cluster and the North Melbourne outbreak.
Area: Truganina – Melton and Wyndham LGAs
Cluster declared: 29 June
Current size: at least 16
What we know: Little is know about this cluster, besides it being a family-based outbreak in Truganina. It's understood that some cases in this cluster are linked to the Al-Taqwa college outbreak in the same suburb.
On 7 July the health department said cases had been added to the cluster but it did not specify how many.
Area: Craigieburn – Hume LGA
Cluster declared: 8 July
Current size: 10
What we know: This cluster is another substantial school-based outbreak in Melbourne's north. It's unknown how many of the cases are students at the school but further contact tracing and testing is under way.
Area: Roxburgh Park – Hume LGA
Cluster declared: 2 July
Current size: 28
What we know: The chief health officer announced this cluster on 2 July, saying links had been traced between eight households across Melbourne.
Besides being associated with a family and centring around the northern suburb of Roxburgh Park, little is so far known about this significant cluster.
Area: Deer Park – Brimbank LGA
Cluster declared: 5 July
Current size: 12
What we know: All that is known is that a social event in Deer Park in Melbourne's west has led to a new outbreak.
Area: Keilor Downs, Albanvale, Laverton – Brimbank, Wyndham LGAs
Cluster declared: 19 June
Current size: 22 (total), 17 (family), six (Coles)
What we know: This is the largest family cluster and it is still active. It has spread across at least eight households in Melbourne but the health department says there is no known connection between this cluster and the previous family outbreak in the same suburb.
This cluster includes a teacher at Albanvale primary school, and students at Keilor View primary school and Keilor Downs college, with both locations closed temporarily for cleaning.
This was the second time Keilor Downs college was closed due to the virus; after a classmate of the infected student tested positive all students at the school were asked to get tested at the Melbourne showgrounds, whether or not they were symptomatic.
Six cases have now also been associated with the Coles Chilled Distribution Centre in Laverton, which is linked to this family cluster. Several of these workers worked while infectious and further contact tracing and testing is under way.
Area: Albanvale – Brimbank LGA
Cluster declared: 27 June
Current size: 15
What we know: Not much is known about this cluster, first mentioned in passing in a health department update on 27 June. It's understood that it is connected to the Keilor Downs family two cluster (above).
On 20 June the department confirmed that a teacher at the school had tested positive to Covid-19 and was connected to the Keilor Downs family. On 22 June two more teachers were diagnosed.
On 27 June the health department said the cluster had grown by two and was defined as a separate outbreak. On 2 July Sutton spoke about a number of school clusters and confirmed that Victoria had seen student-to-student transmission.
Area: Epping, Wollert – Whittlesea LGA
Cluster declared: 24 June
Current size: 17
What we know: This outbreak occurred in the local government area of Whittlesea, which has had comparable numbers of active cases as other council areas deemed "hotspots". But so far the health department has not deemed Whittlesea a problem area.
The outbreak began with a staff member of St Monica's college. By 25 June the department ruled the outbreak was primarily caused by a non-school related social gathering and renamed it the Wollert cluster.
On 26 June the deputy chief health officer confirmed a teenage worker at a McDonald's restaurant in Mill Park had tested positive, with deep cleaning and contact tracing being conducted. This worker is also a student at St Monica's college but there is no established link between that worker and the Wollert social event.
Area: Canterbury – Boroondara LGA
Cluster declared: 7 July
Current size: four
What we know: All that is known is four people associated with the school have tested positive for Covid-19. Further contact tracing and testing is under way.
Area: North Melbourne – City of Melbourne LGA
Cluster declared: 3 July
Current size: 10
What we know: All that is known is this is a newly identified outbreak that stretches across several households, including some in the suburb of North Melbourne.
On 3 July the department stated that through contact tracing, 10 cases had been linked to the outbreak. Further contact tracing, testing and deep cleaning is under way.
Area: Melbourne city
Cluster declared: 27 May
Current size: 17
What we know: This cluster is the first of two outbreaks among staff at hotels hosting quarantined returned international travellers. The cluster is made up of a handful of staff at the Rydges hotel and their close household contacts.
The exact cause of infection is still under investigation, with Sutton suggesting we may never know exactly what happened.
On 6 June, one of only two days Victoria recorded no new cases, the health department was helping to track the movements of a man who travelled to Queensland on 1 June via the Sky Bus and Southern Cross station while infectious. He was described as "linked to a confirmed case from the Rydges" but was not "disclosed as a close contact" and therefore was not isolating. While it appears he is connected to the cluster he is not included in the state's official tally.
Area: Coburg, Pakenham – Moreland and Cardinia LGAs
Cluster declared: 14 June
Current Size: 15
What we know: The Coburg family cluster is spread out across at least three households in Melbourne's north and south-east, all believed to be part of one extended family.
In three days it grew from three to 12 people, and caused the temporary closure of St Dominic's primary school in Broadmeadows after a student tested positive, and Pakenham Springs primary school after two students were found to have Covid-19.
The latest case associated with the cluster was announced on 26 June, bringing the total to 15.
Area: Patterson Lakes, Lysterfield – Kingston and Knox LGAs
Cluster declared: 29 June
Current size: at least 15
What we know: All that is known is that a family spread across the south-eastern Melbourne suburbs of Patterson Lakes and Lysterfield have contracted the virus. Contact tracing is under way.
On 7 July the department said cases had been added to the cluster but it did not specify how many.
Area: Footscray– Maribyrnong LGA
Cluster declared: 3 July
Current size: three
What we know: On 25 June it was announced that a healthcare worker from the Orygen youth mental healthcare centre had tested positive. This cluster has since grown to include an additional healthcare worker and one close contact.
No patients at the Orygen youth mental health inpatient treatment centre have been linked to the cluster.
Area: Essendon– Moonee Valley LGA
Cluster declared: 2 July
Current size: Three
What we know: This cluster is associated with Villa Bambini child are centre in Essendon. It's unknown if these cases originated from a child or staff member, but at least one case is a close contact of someone associated with the facility.
Area: Melbourne – City of Melbourne LGA
Cluster declared: 30 June
Current size: Six
What we know: Not much is known about this cluster. On 30 June it was announced that three cases were linked to the store, including at least one staff member and a household contact of the original case.
The next day an additional three cases were added.
Contact tracing, further testing and deep cleaning of the store is under way.
Area: Caroline Springs – Melton LGA
Cluster declared: 2 July
Current size: three
What we know: All that is known is a number of people associated with the school have tested positive, including at least one student.
Further contact tracing is under way.
Area: Moonee Valley LGA
Cluster declared: 28 June
Current size: unknown
What we know: This cluster was first mentioned on 28 June, but no total was given. Guardian Australia has contacted the health department for clarification.
All that is known is two students, from Ascot Vale primary school and the Essendon Keilor College, Essendon campus, tested positive for Covid-19. Both students are linked to the cluster.
The schools underwent cleaning and contact tracing is under way.
Area: Melbourne
Cluster declared: 4 July
Current size: five
What we know: On 4 July, two new cases were linked to the Optus head office, taking the total to five cases.
A deep clean has been undertaken and the department is investigating if transmission occurred at a social setting outside of work.
Area: Maribyrnong LGA
Cluster declared: 23 June
Current size: five
What we know: The health department identified this cluster with five members of the same family household testing positive to Covid-19. No further cases have been announced and investigations are ongoing into the source.
Area: Tullamarine – Hume LGA
Cluster declared: 30 June
Current size: two
What we know: StarTrack is a transport and logistics company owned by Australia Post. On 3o June the department confirmed that two workers from the facility in Tullamarine had tested positive to Covid-19.
Both worked while infectious and deep cleaning, contact tracing and further testing is under way.
Area: Maidstone – Maribyrnong LGA
Cluster declared: 24 June
Current size: three
What we know: Three staff members have so far tested positive at the Hampstead dental clinic in Maidstone. So far no patients have been identified as close contacts. The clinic was closed temporarily for cleaning and contact tracing is under way.
Although this cluster has previously been referred to as the Maidstone dental cluster it has no association with the Maidstone Dental Clinic, which also operates in the suburb.
Area: Keilor Downs – Brimbank LGA
Cluster declared: 28 May
Current size: 13
What we know: The first Keilor Downs family outbreak is one of the largest family clusters. The last additional case was announced on 31 May, suggesting this cluster may have run its course. The cluster was spread out across several households in the same family and caused the temporary closure of the Keilor Down college and Holy Eucharist primary school in St Albans South after children in the family tested positive.
A teacher had previously tested positive at Keilor Down college but the health department said this was unconnected. Two people in the cluster also attended the Global Resource Recovery centre in Laverton, causing it to be closed for cleaning.
Area: Brooklyn – Brimbank and Wyndham LGAs
Cluster declared: 2 May
Current size: 111
What we know: Cedar Meats is Australia's largest cluster. It's believed to have begun after one worker attended the abattoir while infectious. The close conditions of knife-hands work along the production line, with the cold environment of the boning rooms, caused the virus to spread fast. Due to complications with who workers listed as their employers, the factory wasn't officially told of the first diagnosed case.
Cedar was alerted by the department three days later when a worker accidentally severed their thumb, then later developed Covid-19 symptoms in hospital. When case numbers grew to four the factory was shut down and every worker was told to isolate and be tested. Within in weeks, four cases ballooned to 111, made up of 67 staff members and 44 close contacts.
Area: Fawkner – Moreland LGA
Cluster declared: 9 May
Current size: 13
What we know: This cluster began around the time of the Cedar Meats cluster, originally starting at the Fawkner McDonald's and spreading to a worker at the Craigieburn store through household contacts. On 17 May a driver who serviced the Fawkner McDonald's tested positive.
