Calls to mental health services in Victoria double as strain of Covid-19 lockdown shows
Beyond Blue says 'frustration and exhaustion' is overwhelming many residents as the state enters second lockdown period
Calls from Victorians to mental health support services have doubled in the past fortnight as Melburnians re-enter a six-week lockdown, the chief executive of Beyond Blue has said.
Victorians now make up half of all calls to the organisation, evidence that residents are under increased strain as Covid-19 case numbers rise.
"What people are contacting us talking about is this sense of frustration and exhaustion," the chief executive, Georgie Harman, said. "People are feeling incredibly worried and anxious, they're feeling very overwhelmed."
Mental health services had already been experiencing extremely high demand for mental health services during the pandemic.
"[These numbers] come off the back of contacts to our support services being 60% higher in April and May compared to the same period in 2019 and then 47% higher in June … so we're building off a really high basis," Harman said.
"The reintroduction of stage three restrictions in Victoria [is] just really exacerbating this and I think there is a really low mood and a sense of real uncertainty … There's a lot of concern, stress, worry, anxiety, and that's really having a toll on people's mental health and wellbeing."
While the government measures were important to maintain public health, Harman said many people felt like they were going backwards.
"I think it's feeling for a lot of people like a real kick in the guts," she said. "Most people had done the hard yards and were following the public health advice, and obviously, there's a really worrying rate of community transmission … but that's just really frustrating and a bit overwhelming."
While both the federal and state governments have announced significant funding boosts to mental health support services during the pandemic, Guardian Australia contacted both for comment about whether greater support was needed given the latest developments in Victoria.
A spokesman for the federal health department said it was working with Victoria to respond the the current lockdowns.
"The Australian government, through the Department of Health, is working with the Victorian government to rapidly bring together all the available evidence and respond quickly and in a connected way to support the mental health and wellbeing of Australians, and ensure affected communities are getting services on the ground that are appropriate to their needs."
Meanwhile, support service Lifeline has announced expanded services for young Australians and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples through Australia's first text-based crisis support and suicide prevention service, Lifeline Text.
Some mental health experts have expressed concern over the "missing middle" of patient care. This term refers to programs for people who require more support than the 10 government-subsidised mental health sessions provided in a mental health care plan, but who but have not reached a level of distress that would require going to hospital, or suicide prevention hotlines such as Lifeline, and the associated crisis support.
Prof Patrick McGorry, the executive director of Orygen Youth Mental Health Services, said that the new lockdowns could push people "off the cliff's edge", without sufficient mental health support to catch them.
"I'm hearing messages that 'the services are already there and all you need to do is reach out', and that's simply not the case," McGorry, who is also a lecturer with the University of Melbourne, said. "Giving money to Beyond Blue and Lifeline is important but what happens after? Where are they going to go? The service sector was overwhelmed before Covid."
Government funding for counselling services such as Headspace can have lengthy waitlists, and private psychology isn't financially accessible to all, he said.
"I saw a girl last night that has been struggling for weeks and weeks ... If she hadn't gotten through to me she would have been waiting weeks to be seen," McGorry said.
He hoped the government would invest in pop-up mental health support centres as a way to combat the mental health effects of the virus.
"I've been involved in the design process of adult mental health hubs federally … something like that needs to fast-tracked, so there is like a pop-up version of the adult mental health hub that people can go to. Where people can get some expert mental health in a walk-in, timely way, and then ongoing team-based mental health care."
The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, told ABC News Breakfast on Tuesday that the state government would make an announcement on mental health support in the coming days. Residents who were locked down in the Flemington and North Melbourne housing estates had already been offered mental health support.
Last week the state government announced nearly $2m in additional mental health funding. At the time it was suggested this would be largely diverted to residents in the then 10 hotspot suburbs.
For those who are worried about their mental health deteriorating during the lockdown, Harman said there were some simple tactics people utilise at home.
"Routine is really important. Sleep is really important … keep an eye on your use of alcohol, which disturbs sleep.
"Eat as nutritionally as possible … get as much exercise as possible, even if that's just incidental exercise around your house, apartment or unit."
Harman said during the lockdowns it was imperative not to ignore warning signs of mental distress.
"Seek support as quickly as possible," she said.
"Pick up the phone and speak to one of our counsellors. They will give you immediate strategies to help deal with it, give you coping strategies."
Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636