Victoria-NSW border: swift closure sparks anger and confusion as military move in
Local politicians and residents in divided towns say they have received no information about how permit system will work
More than 700 police officers and military personnel were heading to the border between Victorian and New South Wales on Tuesday to enforce travel conditions that had not yet been defined, using a permit system that was not yet online.
A senior oncologist working in the twin border town of Albury-Wodonga said the lack of information about border permits had caused 20% of their cancer patients to cancel upcoming treatments, because the cancer centre is on the NSW side of the border.
The border between NSW and Victoria was due to close for the first time in a century at midnight on Tuesday, driven by a worrying coronavirus outbreak in Melbourne that recorded a record 191 new cases on Tuesday.
Residents from Melbourne were banned from travelling to NSW from midnight on Monday, on pain of an $11,000 fine. By Tuesday afternoon, Victorian premier Daniel Andrews had announced that the greater Melbourne metropolitan area and the shire immediately to the north of the city would return to lockdown for six weeks, starting at midnight on Wednesday.
But less than 12 hours before the border was due to close with the rest of the state, the NSW police commissioner, Mick Fuller, told reporters in Sydney that authorities were still figuring out how a proposed permit system would work.
Fuller said there would be a "border bubble" for communities straddling the Murray River, to ensure they can cross the border for work, school and healthcare.
But he said the postcodes to be included in that bubble and the acceptable reasons for crossing the border, had yet to be worked out.
Victorians living outside the border bubble will need to qualify for an exemption to travel into NSW, but the conditions for an exemption have also not yet been defined. NSW residents will be able to apply for a permit to return home from Victoria but will have to self-isolate for 14 days upon their arrival.
Police will have the power to turn people back, issue a $1,000 on-the-spot fine to people believed to be falsifying information and an $11,000 fine to anyone crossing the border without permission.
Fuller, who appeared at a press conference alongside the NSW police minister, David Elliott, on Tuesday, said 650 police and 100 personnel from the Australian Defence Force were travelling to the border to patrol five major road crossings, 29 smaller road crossings, and provide aerial surveillance of 20 other minor crossings and dirt roads.
He warned there would be delays crossing the border for the next three days.
"For the first 72 hours, we'll be reasonable in relation to that, knowing that the system hasn't come online," Fuller said.
Albury-Wodonga has a population of about 100,000. Like most border towns it functions as a single community.
More than 10,000 people work across the border, and there are 50,000 car movements a day between the two cities. It has a joint health service funded by the Victorian government which is split across the border: everyone who gives birth in Albury-Wodonga does so in the Wodonga hospital and all cancer treatment is managed in Albury.
"We are five minutes apart," said the Wodonga mayor, Anna Speedie. "[People] don't see a border, they see a river."
Speedie said the lack of information was "disappointing" and suggested that the NSW and Victorian governments should have had a plan in place, developed in the four months since the coronavirus pandemic was declared.
"The pandemic did not just land on us like an earthquake does where we had no idea it was happening," she said.
As of 2pm on Tuesday, Speedie said she still did not know what the border exemptions would look like and how the permit system would work. As of 3pm, the promised permit system was still not on the Services Australia website.
"For [NSW premier] Gladys [Berejiklian] to say 'there is going to be confusion for 72 hours', that's not OK, people need to know if they can go to work tomorrow," she said.
The council has issued letters to its staff to show to police at checkpoints, but said it was unreasonable to expect that the public would feel confident in relying on the "reasonableness" of police in deciding to let them through.
She said there was an undercurrent of fear building in the community – and the police press conference had not helped.
"To start threatening us when we don't even know what the rules are yet – that's not the message," she said. "When you are starting to see cancer patients cancel their appointments, 20% of them … that's really frightening."
Without clear information, Speedie said, people "make it up". The council has received confirmation from police that people will be able to attend health appointments and return home without issue.
Border residents are not the only ones concerned. A Sydney woman, who did not want to use her name, told Guardian Australia that her children were in Melbourne spending the school holidays with their father. They decided to go ahead with the trip after Berejiklian said at two press conferences last week that she did not intend to close the border.
"I know she said 'we told people not to go', but I do have a legal obligation to send them [to see their father]," she said. "I couldn't just not send them, unless there were actual public health orders in place."
They will not begin the journey from Melbourne without a permit.
"I don't have a lot of faith in the reasonableness of NSW police," she said.
Had the Albury-Wodonga councils been consulted, Speedie said, they would have suggested placing the border checkpoint about 50km into Victoria. Because the border is being policed on the NSW side, that is not legally possible.
"It probably would have been sensible to talk to some locals," she said. "A call to us probably would have circumvented some of this."
About 560km along the river, in the Victorian border town of Mildura, the independent MP Ali Cupper had been hopeful of negotiating a localised easing of border restrictions with South Australia before the NSW border announcement on Monday "knocked us for six".
"People can cope with lockdowns, with tough rules, what they can't cope with is uncertainty," she said.
Mildura is 560km from Melbourne and the biggest town in any distance for about 200km; a hub for small farming communities in NSW and SA as well as northern Victoria. Adelaide, 395km to the west, is its closest capital city. NSW is just two minutes from Cupper's office.
Cupper said she was "absolutely gobsmacked" that the Victorian and NSW state governments did not appear to have worked out an actionable contingency plan to deal with this situation.
The Victorian Farmers Federation had been negotiating with the agriculture departments in two states to ensure farmers are on the list of permitted travellers.
The federation's president, David Jochinke, said he hoped the NSW would learn the lessons of border closures in Queensland and South Australia "so people can readily get a permit," but said "the lack of information is hurting at the moment".
Many farmers along the Murray River manage properties on both sides of the river. In the Upper Murray region, just east of Albury-Wodonga, some landholders in NSW have to drive across a bridge into Victoria to leave their property.
"If they don't own a farm on both sides of the border they would have services they need on both sides of the border," Jochinke said.
One such farmer is Robert Belcher, who runs cattle at Berridale in NSW and Bonang in Victoria. He said the border closure was "a catastrophe" because he needed to regularly cross the river to ensure his stock still had water.
"If you're on a border it means bugger all except what number plate you've got," he told the ABC Country Hour.