Border closes between NSW and Victoria as southern state records largest ever jump in Covid-19 cases
Daniel Andrews says Victoria reported 127 new coronavirus cases on Monday along with two deaths, bringing the state's death toll to 22
Victoria has recorded its largest jump in cases at any point in the coronavirus crisis, with 127 cases reported on Monday, as the state confirmed its 21st death and the premier announced the state's border with New South Wales would be closed from midnight on Tuesday.
Daniel Andrews said the border closure would be enforced only on the NSW side.
"[The closure] is the result of a phone hook-up between the prime minister and the premier of New South Wales and myself just an hour or so ago, where we have – all of us – agreed that the best thing to do is to close the border," Andrews said on Monday morning.
"That closure will be enforced on the New South Wales side, so as not to be a drain on resources that are very much focused on fighting the virus right now across our state. I am grateful to the premier of NSW for her support in giving effect to that," he said.
Several towns straddle the NSW and Victorian border, including the regional city of Albury–Wodonga. Andrews said there would be a permit system for those who must conduct unavoidable travel over the border.
"This is very much a decision that is made by myself, the Prime Minister and the premier of NSW … All three of us agreed that this was the appropriate step to take right now. There's no more intrigue to it than that. It wasn't a matter of anything other than a unified and joint position to take this step."
NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian said on Monday the border would be closed due to "unprecedented" community spread Covid-19 around Melbourne.
"I want to stress that what is occurring in Victoria has not yet occurred anywhere else in Australia. It is a new part of the pandemic and, as such, it requires a new type of response," she said.
"Based on the health advice I received this morning, that there is no guarantee that some of the people in regional Victoria may have not been - what they call seeding [the virus]."
Scott Morrison, who has previously spoken against hard borders restricting travel between states, said he had a phone hook up with the NSW and Victorian premiers and they "agreed that now was the time for Victoria to isolate itself from the rest of the country".
In an interview with 2GB on Monday evening, the prime minister drew a distinction between this measure and the other border closures he opposed.
"This isn't other states closing their borders to Victoria. This is Victoria understanding the need to contain an outbreak ... and that is necessitated by the growth in community transmission in those cases. It's regrettable that this has been necessary.
"We're one country and that's important and it's important for our economy but so is maintaining our strong health performance through Covid. All the other states and territories – seven of them – have virtually no community transmission, if any. So it's important to put that protection in place for the time that is needed."
Andrews confirmed that a man in his 90s had died of Covid-19, bringing Victoria's death toll to 21, and the national count to 105. He provided no further details, "out of respect for the family".
Health minister Jenny Miakaos confirmed in a tweet later in the day that a second person, a man in his 60's, had also died after contracting the virus.
More than 3,000 Melburnians remain in hard lockdown in nine public housing towers in the city's inner north and west.
Victorian police commissioner Shane Patton confirmed at a press conference that one man from a Flemington tower has been arrested for attempting to leave the lockdown area and assaulting police.
"[Monday afternoon] we had a 32-year-old male who attempted to leave from one of the towers in Flemington ... a fight occurred where the police were assaulted, and that male bit one of the members and so he was taken into custody and is being processed for assaulting and resisting police as well as an attempted COVID-19 breach."
Andrews said that an additional 26 cases had now been linked to the towers, taking the total to 53.
"We expect that number to continue to grow. If you know it is in there, and you are going to test everybody, then you will find more cases. That is the strategy, that is what we want to be able to achieve. We can then provide care and support and the appropriate framework around anybody who tests positive, and indeed, end the lockdown for those who are not positive sooner rather than later," he said.
The lockdown order has been issued for two weeks, with the government indicating it would initially last for five days and would be assessed on a daily basis.
Andrews defended sending out legal documents to residents that led many to believe the lockdown was already confirmed to be lasting a full fortnight.
"From time to time, there will be steps that you have to take that may not necessarily be ideal. But people have a right to understand an Act of the Victorian Parliament, to know exactly what their status at law is. I would hope that didn't add to any distress," he said.
The housing minister, Richard Wynne, acknowledged that some residents felt they had not received adequate government support.
"I know that there's been some commentary about, perhaps, people who have not necessarily received the level of support that they would have liked, but I just want to assure all residents that we are doing absolutely everything that we can to both reach out and support people in this really difficult time at the moment."
Patton said 500 police officers are deployed across the nine towers every day.
"We've adopted a policing model where we have a number of police working in pairs, and they have two or three floors each to patrol and they're patrolling those floors, as well as the use of CCTV cameras, to be able to determine where there's a need to respond to any specific areas if there's non-compliance," he said.
"I would love nothing more than to get through this. And for this to be held up as a model where people say that was absolutely amazing. The police and the communities were together. They managed to achieve something that was so difficult. And they did it in a peaceful in a combined in a united matter, and it didn't hurt the relationship. In fact, it enhances the relationship."
Patton said that Victorian Police would consider accepting logistical assistance from the Australia Defence force as the tower operation went on.
Levels of domestically acquired cases in recent weeks have far outstripped those during the peak of the virus's first wave, when statewide lockdowns were in place. The chief health officer, Brett Sutton, said wider lockdowns were under serious consideration.
"We're not excluding that possibility. We have always flagged that we have got these two tools – the testing and tracing tool and the physical distancing tool. We worked extremely hard the get the word out … But we need to form a view over coming days as to whether that's a sufficient suppression of transmission."
Sutton defended not extending lockdowns to more postcodes on Monday despite high case numbers in suburbs near the tower blocks.
"There's significant spillover and so to use the bushfire analogy, there are literally spot fires adjacent to those restricted postcodes. But people are absolutely being engaged in those areas, so there's lots of doorknocking, there are lots of tests that are occurring."
More cases were also added to existing outbreaks in Monday's figures. The Al-Taqwa College outbreak grew by 16, taking the total to 77. One new case was linked to the Truganina family outbreak, and two additional cases were linked to the Paterson Lakes/Lysterfield family outbreak.