What we know about Victoria's coronavirus public housing tower 'hard lockdowns'
What does 'hard lockdown' mean and what assistance is available to residents?
Some 3,000 public housing residents living in nine tower block estates in the Melbourne suburbs of Flemington and North Melbourne were placed into "hard lockdown" for at least five days on the afternoon of 4 July.
The decision, announced at a press conference on Saturday and effective immediately, was in response to 24 coronavirus cases that have been diagnosed in the two estates.
Some residents have said they learned about the lockdown by watching the premier, Daniel Andrews, announce it on television and received no further indication of what support would be provided. On Sunday, Andrews held a second press conference to outline new measures to support residents during the lockdown.
Here's what we know so far.
There are "detention" directions in place for the following buildings: In Flemington: 12 Holland Court; 120 Racecourse Road; 126 Racecourse Road; 130 Racecourse Road; In North Melbourne: 12 Sutton Street; 33 Alfred Street; 76 Canning Street; 159 Melrose street; 9 Pampus Street.
There are 3,000 residents in the 1,345 units.
Residents will not be allowed to leave their units under almost any circumstances for at least five days. The only exceptions are if a person is granted express permission by authorities to receive care at a medical facility, or to leave their home for compassionate reasons or in an emergency.
Residents are also not allowed to have any visitors. People under 18 who live alone may have their parents or guardians stay with them, but they must also agree to the terms of the lockdown.
The truth is this is not clear. The public health orders state a 14-day detention direction, however, Andrews has said the intention is to have everyone tested within five days and then make a decision on future steps from there.
In statements issued on Saturday and Sunday, the government said it would provide support in the form of care packages with essential items and food deliveries.
The government says residents are receiving care packages with households items and food deliveries, includes boxes non perishables, other staples like bread and milk, as home cooked meals. However, some residents have said they have not received these goods, or that they were mismatched (some reported getting Weetbix but no milk), or that the products were culturally inappropriate (particularly for people with Halal requirements).
A government statement released on Monday said 500 packs of essential supplies and over 3,000 meals were delivered to residents on Sunday night with the help of charities and unions. Some residents have said they have managed to order food through delivery services such as Uber Eats, which they have collected from the foyer. Others say they have been unable to do this. Separately, African-Australian community groups have also been distributing food to residents.
Residents will receive two weeks of rent relief, saving them about $340. People who are not working who live in the affected towers will also receive a specific $750 hardship payment per household, while those who are employed and will be unable to go to work will receive $1,500, also per household.
On Sunday, Andrews said public health workers and nurses would move through the buildings to conduct the tests. But in practice, reports from residents suggested on Monday that tenants were being asked to come down from their flats to ground level to undergo testing.
People who refuse a test will be detained for a further 10 days from the end of the detention period, according to the public health orders. This is similar to the order introduced for people in hotel quarantine who refuse a test.
On Sunday, Andrews insisted residents would be able to access drug and alcohol services, mental health and family violence supports and physical healthcare, including for those with preexisting medical conditions. Drug services would include methadone and other therapies, Andrews said.
Some activists and community organisations have been critical of the deployment of police to the two estates, which have large multicultural populations. There 500 police per shift deployed to maintain order in the estates, according to the government. They will be stationed on most floors and at the perimeters.
Andrews would not be drawn on the consequences for residents who did not return to their buildings on Saturday, which was a requirement under the public health directions. The orders say there are fines for breaching the directions.
In short, yes. The government said on Sunday that translators were onsite and would go door-to-door to help explain the directions and offer assistance. However, earlier on Sunday afternoon, some residents confirmed they were yet to be contacted and provided with any information. Andrews said this would happen as soon as possible. Residents in the flats have also been translating public messages to share information within various community and language groups.
The government said it would also distribute activity boxes for kids including crayons, Lego and puzzle books. Andrews also said the government was in discussion with Telstra about providing wi-fi connectivity for the affected towers, although no further details were given.
The government said it was also establishing a hotline for residents. The number for the Housing Call Centre is 1800 961 054. It has also created a "Community Connector" program for people "experiencing loneliness or social disconnection with a friendly ear and lending a hand to get online, arrange for pet care or connect to local supports and services".
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.