'It's so arbitrary': Melbourne street split down the middle by Covid-19 lockdown
The West Footscray side of Summerhill Road faces business shutdowns and school holidays indoors while the Footscray side has been spared
For the residents of Summerhill Road, being split down the middle between Footscray and West Footscray always had its perks.
"They do their garbage on a Tuesday and we do ours of a Friday, so if they have full rubbish on a Friday they can bring it on this side, and we can do it right back," says Margaret Chase, a longtime resident of the street. "It's a good community around here."
But on Tuesday afternoon, when the premier of Victoria read out the postcodes that would be plunged back into lockdowns for the next month, that sense of community was tested.
Footscray was spared, West Footscray was not, and at 11.59pm on Wednesday night an invisible line went up down the centre of the suburban road.
For those in lockdown, the consequences are serious.
Ness Camacho, a resident of a small retirement village on the west of the road, says she is struggling with the prospect of being separated from her family for another month.
"It's not easy for us. I'm 70, my husband, he is in a wheelchair. It's good for him to have the family come to visit, to give him time to socialise, to give support, but now they cannot," she says.
"It's really hard, we were back to going out to lunch with the family, now we have been locked down again … If I was on that other side I would be happy."
Some residents weren't even aware they were so close to the suburb boundary.
"What a bloody stitch-up!" says Cal, when he learns his neighbours across the street won't be forced to stay at home.
"Mate, the other side is Footscray, they aren't locked down!" he calls out to his roommates. "What a stitch-up!"
Cal, who asked for his last name not to be included, says it seemed strange to divide the street.
"Like it is what it is, you know, but that feels totally redundant … How are they going to police that? If the police pull me up and ask where I live I'll just say the other side."
A few houses down, Fionnuala Twomey's family is preparing for the school holidays to be spent inside.
"We had a holiday booked for this weekend which we have had to cancel … The kids are really disappointed but at the same time we have done this before," she says.
"It's so arbitrary, we are obviously in the same situation really. It's just about accepting that they had to draw a boundary somewhere … It is what it is, I'm not going to go to parliament to protest," she chuckles.
Rather than wishing his side wasn't locked down, the Summerhill Road resident Kennet Tran is wishing the other side was too.
"My father is very old so we have the responsibility to keep him safe … People just do whatever they want, I would like [the other side] to follow those rules but it's up to them."
Across the street, residents are relieved but confused.
"It's good in a way, but it's a bit pointless at the same time," says Tom Copsey. "People still work in the CBD so they are still going to be going in a spreading it around."
He says he is still confused as to how the local lockdowns even work.
"I go to the shops in West Footscray, but am I allowed to go?… I know I'm allowed to travel, but am I allowed to travel over there?" he says gesturing to the opposite side of the street.
Margaret Chase also lives on the lucky side, but she says she doesn't see it like that.
"I don't know if you would call it luck. In the overall picture I don't think anyone is going to win out of it being this way.
"There are still people that will be getting through the cracks. I don't think [the government] made the right choice."
Summerhill Road is just off the main drag, Barkly Street. On Wednesday the Footscray end was buzzing, while West Footscray businesses were deciding if they should even stay open.
"It's been a shit day, a really shit day," says Ken Fu, owner of Blunt Barbers.
"I can't afford to shut down again. I've already closed down for six weeks, if I close down again I'm going to have to sack people … I've had people cancelling already, so many."
Across the road, Migrant Coffee was back up to serving drinks four days a week before the new lockdown was announced.
"We will close completely until they lift restrictions," says Stacey Earsman who co-owns the cafe.
"It's not viable for us, for such a small business to keep takeaways available … We don't have access to people from all the other suburbs now, we can only serve West Footscray … It's a smaller pool and our pool is locked down."
Earsman's co-owner, Melodee Malazarte, says they were at peace with the lockdowns.
"Financially it's crushed us … but it's a health concern and we sell coffee and bagels, which is not an essential to life … We want to do what we can for our community and not provide an excuse for people to go out of their houses for nothing. If we take a loss we take a loss.
"You just got to do it ... we don't see the point of being negative," she says.
"We just have a perspective when it comes to business. We just know that we will find a way to make it work, no matter what."
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.