Employers flooded with job applications despite higher rate of welfare benefits, data finds
The number of applicants per job at the end of June was 16% above pre-coronavirus levels
The increased rate of welfare benefits during the coronavirus crisis has not stopped unemployed people flooding employers with job applications, new data finds.
As the Morrison government argues the doubled rate of jobseeker payment is deterring people from taking up work, figures obtained by the Guardian show employers are generally receiving far more applications per position than before the pandemic.
Unpublished data from employment marketplace Seek showed at the end of June the number of applicants per job was sitting about 16% above February – or-pre-Covid – levels.
The measure – known as "candidate availability" – hit 40% above February levels in April, when the website recorded its lower point of job ad volume growth, and was still about 30% above pre-pandemic levels earlier in June.
Among the reasons for the high number of applications per job has been the scarcity of new positions due to Covid-19 restrictions, and the figures do show candidate availability is slowly starting to fall as more positions become available.
However, experts noted a high number of job applications is notable given the suspension of Centrelink mutual obligations, which usually forces jobseekers to apply for up to 20 jobs a month.
It comes after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, provoked the ire of welfare groups on Monday by referring to "anecdotal feedback" that some businesses were finding it hard to find staff because of the boosted payments.
On Tuesday, the Guardian reported that a National Skills Commission survey cited by the employment minister, Michaelia Cash, to make a similar argument was based on just a handful of responses from among 2,324 surveyed employers.
Labor has accused the government of being out of touch over the claims, pointing to Australian Bureau of Statistics data that shows there are 12 Australians on unemployment payments for every one vacancy.
Bronwyn Pike, the chief executive of UnitingCare VicTas, joined the fray on Wednesday, telling the Senate's Covid-19 inquiry claims that people were foregoing work to collect the boosted benefits represented a "complete mismatch" with the "actual reality of the work environment we find ourselves in".
Pike said over time the Australian psyche had changed so that "we have got into this posture where people who are seeking income support are somehow lazy or not willing to participate in the workforce".
"I don't meet people like that," she said. "Even with the increased support it's still a very low remuneration."
Cash heralded the release of another report by the skills commission on Wednesday, which showed a small increase in the number of employers looking to hire.
"The jobs lost during the pandemic will not be the same jobs Australians will return to in the Covid-safe economy," she said. "There is evidence of structural shifts that will require jobseekers to actively reskill to meet the skills needs of employers."
The number of people receiving the jobseeker payment is at 1.6 million, about double the usual cohort of beneficiaries. Since April these people have been receiving a boosted version of the payment, which has been increased from about $560 to about $1,100 a fortnight, although the temporary rate expires in September.
Other jobs search engines also reported demand for jobs was high. Callam Pickering, an economist at another jobs portal, Indeed, said the average advertisement was "being seen by more people now than before the Covid-19 crisis".
"There is greater competition for the roles that are available, consistent with the higher unemployment rate," he said.
"However it is also important to note the following: since the federal government relaxed 'mutual obligations' – requiring those receiving unemployment benefits to actively search for and apply for jobs – a comparison between pre-crisis and Covid-19 job seeker behaviour is not really an apples-to-apples comparison."