Social dis-dancing Australian nightclub patrons told to stay in their seats to 'chair bop'
As Queensland relaxes Covid-19 rules, up to 100 people will be allowed into reopening venues. There's just one catch …
Queensland's nightclubs could pioneer a new craze – social dis-dancing – when they open this weekend under rules that will force patrons to remain seated.
"It will be a little bit different," says Tammy Wood, the marketing manager of Retro's in Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. "We'll need to bring in extra chairs. Everyone will have to do the chair bop dance."
From Friday, as the state relaxes its coronavirus restrictions, up to 100 people will be allowed into nightclubs.
But a reopened Fortitude Valley might end up a bit like the town from Footloose. No dancing will be allowed.
"You can listen to the music," the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, told reporters on Tuesday.
The restriction poses a logistical challenge for venues desperate to open their doors or bring more patrons through.
Retro's – which serves fishbowl cocktails and plays throwback tracks that cram the dancefloor – will have hand sanitiser, security guards and give patrons regular reminders of social distancing requirements.
"Definitely no dancing to the Spice Girls," Wood said.
"We're really excited to be able to open up the doors [but] after a couple of drinks it's going to be hard for people to contain that excitement. We'll be a broken record advising our patrons [about the rules].
"It is definitely [going to be a unique experience]. It's first in best dressed due to the capacity numbers."
Laruche, a cocktail bar and nightclub in the Valley, has been open in a heavily restricted capacity for a few weeks.
Geoffrey Slater from the bar said the requirement to provide seating was difficult for his and other venues.
"Now we can have up to 100 people but I've got to go and buy new seats and I honestly don't know how it's going to work," he said. "Only a bureaucrat could come up with that sort of an idea."
Slater said the business had struggled during the lockdown.
Some venues told Guardian Australia they were not planning to open yet.