South and west drive record-breaking surge in coronavirus cases across US
America is breaking records for new coronavirus cases almost every day and hospitals in the new hotspots in southern and western states are under severe strain – as a health expert warned that if the surge continued the US was entering "one of the most unstable times" in its history.
The US saw a record increase of new confirmed cases of Covid-19 on Friday, with more than 66,000 new cases, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker.
Various media use their own databases or other sources and NBC reported there were 71,000 new cases in the US on Friday, while the New York Times database noted that cases rose by 68,000 on Friday, setting a single-day record for the seventh time in 11 days.
All the statistics point to the surge not only continuing but accelerating, and the national death rate, after declining since May, is starting to rise again.
The state health department of Arizona reported on Saturday that adult intensive care unit beds in the state were now 90% occupied, rising from 89% on Thursday. Hospitals are filling up, as they are in parts of Texas and Florida.
The US surpassed 3 million total infections earlier this week – the most of any country in the world – and is also reporting higher daily increases in infections than anywhere else, with Brazil second amid a surge in the virus there, too.
If the US continues on this trajectory, it will reach "one of the most unstable times in the history of our country", Peter Hotez, dean of tropical medicine at Baylor College of Medicine, in Texas, told CNN on Friday night.
He added that if hospitals become overwhelmed "we won't have enough manpower, human power, to manage all of this".
Most states saw some sort of increase in new cases this week, according to data from Johns Hopkins. After the virus pummeled the US north-east in April and May, the "Sun Belt" region across the south of the country is beginning its own crisis in the midst of dramatic increases in infections.
And a long-expected upturn in US coronavirus deaths has begun, driven by fatalities in states in the latest regional surges.
The number of deaths per day from the virus had been falling in May and June but an analysis by the Associated Press showed the seven-day rolling average for daily reported deaths in the US has increased from 578 two weeks ago to 664 on 10 July.
States in the midwest are also beginning to see a rise in cases.
The surge relates to a swift reopening of businesses across many states before federal public health guidelines on declining cases were met, and without social distancing and mask-wearing in public being adhered to.
A report published on Friday revealed the 12 busiest hospitals in the Houston metro area in Texas are starting to tell their emergency responders that they cannot safely take in new patients because they are overwhelmed with coronavirus patients.
Officials announced there were 10,000 patients in hospitals across Texas on Friday due to the virus. The state hit 10,000 new cases in a single day on Tuesday, with new totals hovering around that number over the past week. Texas also saw its deadliest week so far, with three days straight of 100 new fatalities.
Governor Greg Abbott said Texas will probably see worse numbers in coming weeks. The governor said the fatalities the state had seen over the last week were most likely from people who were infected in May.
Around that time, Texas was allowing businesses, including bars and restaurants, to reopen with reduced capacity. The number of infections in the state began to surge in June, leading Abbott to close bars again and reduce restaurant capacity.
Abbott said on Friday that he would be forced to further reverse reopenings if people do not comply with his mask order. But his order comes with a caveat: in the state, counties with a high number of active Covid-19 cases must implement mask mandates, while counties with lower numbers can opt out, as many have decided to.
Other states in the south are also seeing alarming rises in infection numbers and are struggling to figure out how to contain the virus.
Georgia saw its highest increase in new cases on Friday with 4,484 new infections in a 24-hour period.
Response to the increase in cases has led to a turf war between the Democratic mayor of the state's largest city, Atlanta, and its Republican governor, with Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms saying on Friday that the city will roll back its reopening and Governor Brian Kemp saying state rules override that and the reopening cannot be undone.
In Florida, the Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, has received criticism from Democratic leaders in the state for not taking more proactive measures to contain the virus, like issuing a statewide mask mandate and closing beaches.
"The bottom line is sickness and death are piling up at the feet of Ron DeSantis," said the US representative Debbie Wasserman-Schultz at a news conference with other Democrats.
Florida nearly reached 11,433 new cases on Friday – just short of the 11,458 new cases it had last Saturday. State officials also said on Friday that nearly 7,000 patients were currently hospitalized with Covid-19.