Three more Welsh councils to go into coronavirus lockdown
Neath Port Talbot, Torfaen and Vale of Glamorgan will be covered by latest restrictions
Three more council areas in south Wales are to go into local lockdown, the Welsh government has announced.
Neath Port Talbot, Torfaen and the Vale of Glamorgan will be covered by the restrictions from 6pm on Monday, from which time people will not be able to enter or leave the areas without a reasonable excuse.
People will not be able to meet indoors with anyone they do not live with, and extended households will be suspended. The decision means more than 1.8 million people – about 60% of the Welsh population – will be covered by local restrictions.
Mark Drakeford, the first minister, said: "Following a worrying rise in cases of coronavirus across south Wales, we took action on Friday to introduce local coronavirus restrictions in Llanelli and local restrictions will come into force in our two largest cities – Cardiff and Swansea – tonight.
"We are now taking further action and placing three more areas under local restrictions in south Wales – Neath Port Talbot, Torfaen, and the Vale of Glamorgan – because we are seeing rising rates in these three areas. These areas also share borders with local authority areas where rates are much higher.
"Introducing restrictions in any parts of Wales is always an incredibly difficult decision for us to make. But we're acting to protect people's health and to try and break the chain of transmission and stop the situation from getting worse.
"This is not a regional lockdown – this is a series of local restrictions in each local authority area to respond to a specific rise in cases in each area, which have distinct and unique chains of transmission.
"In some places, such as Caerphilly and Newport, we have seen really positive falls in response and we hope they can begin to be relaxed if they continue.
"It's really important everyone follows the rules where they live. We need everyone's help to bring coronavirus under control. We need everyone to pull together and to follow the measures, which are there to protect you and your loved ones."