Johnson's latest U-turn on Covid restrictions: Politics Weekly podcast
Heather Stewart and Josh Halliday discuss the latest restrictions announced by the prime minister. James Schneider and Anna Turley talk about Keir Starmer's performance at the Labour party's virtual conference, Connected. Plus, Libby Brooks examines how Scotland's response to Covid has influenced voters' opinions on independence
From Thursday, 10pm curfews will be imposed on pubs and restaurants across the country. There is now a ban on indoor team sports – and plans for a partial return of sports fans to stadiums from 1 October have been paused. Wedding celebrations will be limited to just 15 guests. Oh, and we're now being asked to work from home if we can.
So did the government prematurely choose to protect the UK economy over the public? And have they damaged both irreversibly by reopening everything too quickly?
On Tuesday, Keir Starmer gave his keynote speech at the virtual Labour party conference , Connected. Heather is joined by Anna Turley, the ex-MP for Redcar – one of the famous "red wall" seats lost to the Conservatives in the last election – and James Schneider, former advisor to Jeremy Corbyn, to talk about the direction the party is going under its new leadership.
Plus, Libby Brooks examines how Scotland's response to Covid has influenced voters' opinions on Scottish independence.
The Guardian is editorially independent.
And we want to keep our journalism open and accessible to all.
But we increasingly need our readers to fund our work.
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.