'Boris gives UK both barrels': how UK papers covered Johnson's Covid speech
Prime minister's appeal for discipline and national unity in face of 'invisible enemy' gets blanket coverage with its sheer grimness
Boris Johnson's bleak televised speech setting out months of coronavirus restrictions dominates Wednesday's front pages, with quotes aplenty and varying degrees of optimism.
The Daily Mail reflects the full force of the prime minister's speech: "Boris give UK both barrels". It focuses on his criticism of those breaching the rules and the main image nods to his mention of using the army to support the police.
The Guardian raises the prospect of a second lockdown if the new restrictions are not followed. It notes Johnson suggests "freedom-loving" Britons will be to blame if more draconian restrictions are applied.
The Mirror paints the crisis in terms of a gamble by the PM, with the headline: "Boris in last chance saloon". It reports he is banking on early closing times for pubs to avoid a second big lockdown.
Metro goes with a hint of humour, opting for a simple "Rule of 6 months", and reminding readers it is shaping up to be a grim Christmas.
The Times picks a quote from Johnson's Churchillian speech in perhaps the most upbeat front page. "A struggle humanity will win," it quotes him as saying, noting the prime minister's u-turn on getting workers back into the office.
The Telegraph also goes for gravitas and picks a quote warning the fight against Covid is not yet over. It also notes the PM signalling the possible use of the army and the prospect of restrictions until March next year.
The FT says "Johnson warns of 'perilous' time as curbs imposed for 6 months", focusing on the business reaction and choosing a side image of Johnson in the Commons.
The Daily Express goes with what might be construed as the PM's gentle chiding of the nation during his "heartfelt" television appeal. It reports: "The country needs to summon "discipline, resolve and the spirit of togetherness" to save lives this winter. "Our destiny is in our own hands," is the headline. It chooses an image of Johnson with not one but both fists clenched.
The i includes the full grandeur of the backdrop to Johnson's speech but skips to the response to his words. The headline is: "PM told: new rules won't cut infection rate."
In Scotland, the Edinburgh Evening News says simply: "Shutdown" in response to first minister Nicola Sturgeon's speech on restrictions including a ban on household visits.
The Scotsman carries a large image of Sturgeon alongside the latest tightening of restrictions. It also carries one of the more hopeful quotes from her speech: "Let's keep going, try to keep smiling, keep hoping and keep looking out for each other."
Dundee's Courier captures the mood for the months ahead with a poster front page and the headline: "Scotland braced for a long and lonely winter."