Toilet roll sales rise by more than a fifth amid new UK Covid-19 restrictions
Manufacturer insists supplies will not run out as long as customers don't panic buy
Sales of toilet rolls have soared by 23% over the past week and manufacturers are preparing for further increases in consumer demand after the introduction of fresh coronavirus restrictions across most of the UK.
WEPA Group, which produces toilet paper and kitchen towels for the UK consumer market from its site in Bridgend, south Wales, said it expected sales to remain high but insisted that supplies would not run out.
In March, supermarkets were forced to bring in purchase limits, rationing toilet paper and a number of other products including pasta, hand soap and antibacterial wipes, as shoppers stripped the shelves.
WEPA UK, which produces own-brand toilet paper for supermarkets including Tesco, Sainsbury's and the Co-op, said it had learned lessons from earlier in the year and insisted that the UK would have sufficient supplies, provided shoppers behaved responsibly.
"We are doing all that we can to ensure stock remains available," said Mike Docker, the joint managing director at WEPA UK, "including rationalising some niche embossed patterns and focusing on larger pack sizes, which we know were in demand in March".
Docker said the firm has also put in place "back-up production facilities and has hauliers on standby" but cautioned that consumers need to "act on the advice provided by the supermarkets when buying".
Supermarkets said there had been signs of shoppers buying a few extra tinned tomatoes and large bags of dried pasta since Sunday but they insisted reports of panic buying were overstated.
The Iceland boss Richard Walker said: "Everyone has got to keep a clear head. There were unpleasant scenes last time around and there was no need for it. There are no product shortages."Waitrose said it had not seen significant changes in behaviour but had prepared for any potential shift by stocking up on the kinds of goods that were stripped from shelves in March.
"We have prepared and are confident we have got the right goods in the right place," a spokeswoman said.