What are the new coronavirus rules in England?
See the key points from Boris Johnson's announcement of more robust restrictions
Boris Johnson has announced a series of new, more robust coronavirus restrictions to come into force across England in a speech to parliament, followed by a TV address on Tuesday evening.
These are the key points of what he told the Commons – and how England and Scotland are once again taking different paths
"We are once again asking office workers who can work from home to do so," Johnson announced. He said the change would take effect immediately. As previously, where this is not possible, such as with construction and hospitality, staff should still attend their places of work, within Covid guidelines, he explained.
This might not prove such a significant change, given many office staff have not returned to offices at all. But it marks a notable switch in tone from only a few weeks ago, when ministers were urging people to consider going back to workplaces to help the economies of town and city centres. One briefing even warned committed home workers that they were more likely to lose their job.
Amid concerns that crowds of pub drinkers are connected to a least part of the recent rise in infections, especially among younger people, from Thursday there will be a table service-only rule for all hospitality businesses, apart from takeaways. They must also close between 10pm and 5am, although deliveries can take place later.
This will be a significant blow to the sector, with Johnson expressing regret that the move would "hurt many businesses just getting back on their feet". It also remains to be seen whether what is, in effect, little more than tweaks to the rules will have sufficient impact.
All retail and hospitality staff have to wear masks, as well as customers in pubs, bars and restaurants, apart from when they have sat down to eat or drink. Businesses that breach the rules could be fined or closed down. All taxi and minicab passengers must also wear masks. All these measures come in from Thursday, apart from the rules about masks in taxis, which begin on Wednesday.
This is another step intended to reduce infection while not closing down the entire hospitality industry for a second time. Again, it remains to be seen whether this will be enough.
From Monday, there will be changes to existing rules on mixing. Weddings and wedding receptions will be limited to 15 people, although funerals can still have 30. Indoor team sports will no longer be allowed – meaning, for example, that five-a-side football games can take place on outdoor pitches, but not inside sports centres. This applies to all ages, meaning children are not exempt.
Plans to trial limited live audiences next month, for example at sports events, are being shelved. While not unexpected, this is a significant blow to smaller football teams and the like, with Labour warning that extra support might be required.
Johnson made it clear that the measures would only work if people complied. And to focus minds, there will be stricter enforcement of the rules, with more put into law. As well as fines of up to £10,000 for miscreant businesses, individual fines for first-time breaches will double to £200.
Police and councils will get £60m to help with extra enforcement, with the option of calling on assistance from the military.
This will not lead to soldiers handing out fines – military support will be limited to personnel taking on duties such as guarding buildings usually protected by police, allowing police officers to do other duties.
Johnson was at pains to stress the measures did not amount to a new lockdown – saying the rules were a "delicate balance" between limiting coronavirus infections and not overly harming the economy.
However, this does not mean a full, national lockdown has been ruled out. If the revamped rules fail to reduce Covid-19 infection rates, Johnson said, the government "reserves the right to deploy greater firepower, with greater restrictions". This is very much not the outcome the government wants. But the public has been warned that if they do not comply with the new rules, this could be what happens.
Having predicted only weeks ago that the UK could be close to normal before Christmas thanks to the "moonshot" plan for mass testing, Johnson said people should expect these rules to last for perhaps six months, "unless we palpably make progress". He added: "For the time being this virus is a fact of our lives."
This longer-term view was reinforced by a subsequent summary of the new advice released by Downing Street, which said that people should, where possible, plan on working from home "over the winter".
Johnson was blunt. The country, he said, faces "a perilous turning point", with daily coronavirus infections almost four times higher than a month ago, and the "R" rate for reinfection well above one.
The PM referred to Monday's briefing by the government's two top medical and scientific advisers, which warned that without robust action, the UK could be experiencing about 50,000 new Covid cases a day by mid-October, and about 200 deaths a day a month after that.
With the Covid alert level raised from 3 to 4, meaning a potentially exponential rise in infection, Johnson said: "This is the moment when we must act."
The PM's other central message was that taking action now would reduce the chances of having to impose another full-scale lockdown, as seen in spring, something he said he wanted to avoid at all costs.
Johnson repeatedly assured the doubters, a number of whom sit on the Conservative benches, that he was seeking "the maximum reduction in the R number with the minimum damage to livelihoods", and apologised for the impact on hospitality businesses.
He also offered MPs "every opportunity" for parliament to scrutinise the decisions, promising regular briefings with government scientists. The PM also stressed his dislike at having to "stifle our freedoms".
The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said he backed the plans, but criticised the government for its failings in areas such as testing and a lack of consistent leadership. There was also some mild initial pushback from Tory former ministers, with Jeremy Hunt calling for more efforts over testing.
Steve Baker, the influential Tory backbencher, went further in calling for some sort of formal committee of MPs to help consider new rules before they came into place. In a question to Johnson which will remind Downing Street that public backing for tougher restrictions is more fragmented than in March, Baker said such involvement from MPs would help the public "have the confidence that their representatives are authorising the use of laws to constrain their freedoms".
That is a matter for the devolved governments, and while Johnson said he expected them to take similar steps, this has not always been the case.
Shortly after Johnson's statement the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, announced a ban across Scotland on households visiting each other, as already in place in the west of Scotland, and in Northern Ireland. She also said people should avoid sharing cars with people from other households. There are exceptions to the rules, for example over childcare, and children and teenagers can meet outside in larger groups.
Expected changes to Covid rules in Wales are likely to be announced soon.
Sturgeon's decision to go further than Johnson will not be entirely welcomed inside Downing Street, especially if continued increases in infection rates means the English rules have to be tightened.