Northern Ireland health minister criticises Van Morrison anti-lockdown songs
Robin Swann describes Morrison's condemnations of government and scientists as 'dangerous … bizarre and irresponsible'
Northern Ireland health minister Robin Swann has criticised Van Morrison, after the veteran songwriter condemned coronavirus lockdown measures as "fascist".
In the forthcoming song No More Lockdown, Belfast-born Morrison sings of "Imperial College scientists making up crooked facts." He adds: "No more lockdown / No more government overreach / No more fascist bullies / Disturbing our peace … Pretending it's for our safety / When it's really to enslave."
Writing in Rolling Stone, Swann says: "We expected better from him … Some of what is he saying is actually dangerous. It could encourage people not to take coronavirus seriously. If you see it all as a big conspiracy, then you are less likely to follow the vital public health advice that keeps you and others safe."
He accuses Morrison of "a smear on all those involved in the public health response to a virus that has taken lives on a massive scale. His words will give great comfort to the conspiracy theorists – the tin foil hat brigade who crusade against masks and vaccines and think this is all a huge global plot to remove freedoms."
Swann adds: "He's chosen to attack attempts to protect the old and vulnerable in our society. It's all bizarre and irresponsible. I only hope no one takes him seriously. He's no guru, no teacher," the last line a reference to Morrison's 1986 album No Guru, No Method, No Teacher.
Morrison's campaign against restrictions has dented his previously revered status in Northern Ireland, where David Cook, a founding member of the Alliance party and former Belfast lord mayor, died last Saturday after being infected with coronavirus. He was 76. Emmet McDonough-Brown, an Alliance party Belfast city councillor, has asked the council to consider revoking the freedom of the city granted to Morrison in 2013.
Meanwhile, Niall Murphy, a prominent Belfast solicitor who almost died from the virus, told the BBC Morrison's songs were "offensive and dangerous … I had a ventilator placed down my gullet while I was in an induced coma for 14 days, and the same time in recovery, and then in and out of intensive care and I would not want anybody to experience that."
The singer has at least one outspoken defender: Sammy Wilson, the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) MP who has chafed at rules on masks and other pandemic measures. Morrison's protest songs raised important points, said Wilson. "How much of our freedom do we give to the government and how much should the government rely on us to use our common sense?"
The controversy came as Northern Ireland prepared to impose fresh restrictions on social gatherings. From 6pm on Tuesday people must avoid mixing indoors with people from another household, with some exceptions. No more than six people from two households will be able to meet in private gardens.
Last week, other high-profile musicians rejected the seriousness of coronavirus. Stone Roses frontman Ian Brown released a new song, Little Seed Big Tree, singing of "a false vaccine, like a bad dream" and a "Masonic lockdown in your home town". He voiced other conspiracy theories, such as an alleged plan for the UK government to microchip its population "to have complete control", and the alleged danger of "5G radiation beamed to Earth from space by satellites".
He also tweeted: "No lockdown no tests no tracks no masks no vax." Later he wrote: "But Ian 'wearing a mask in a pandemic is the correct and sensible thing to do!' I agree. But what pandemic? #researchanddestroy #housearrest."
Noel Gallagher also complained of the need to wear masks, saying: "There's too many fucking liberties being taken away from us now … I choose not to wear one… they're pointless." Contrary to British law, he claimed "it's not a law" to wear a mask in public places.