Q&A: what the new Covid rules mean for north-west England and Yorkshire
What are the new restrictions coming in on Tuesday and whom do they apply to?
Tougher coronavirus restrictions have been announced in large parts of north-west England, West Yorkshire and the Midlands from Tuesday, as the UK health secretary, Matt Hancock, refused to rule out a national lockdown in the face of surging infections.
But with specific rules already in place in many parts of the country, understanding local lockdowns has become increasingly difficult. Here we break down what the new restrictions are and who they apply to.
Stricter measures will be in force from Tuesday 22 September in Merseyside, Warrington, Halton in Cheshire, Lancashire (excluding Blackpool), Wolverhampton, Oadby and Wigston in Leicestershire, and Bradford, Kirklees and Calderdale in West Yorkshire. The general rules apply to socialising with other households, while some regions will have curfews placed on hospitality venues and people are advised to avoid non-essential trips on public transport.
Residents will not be allowed to socialise with people outside their household or support bubbles in private homes or gardens.
Leisure and entertainment venues – including restaurants, pubs and cinemas – must close between 10pm and 5am. Restaurants, pubs and bars will be restricted to table service only.
Residents are advised to only use public transport for essential trips, such as travelling to work or school.
They are also advised to avoid attending amateur and semi-professional sporting events as spectators.
People who are shielding in parts of Blackburn that are already under local restrictions will no longer need to from 5 October.
It is understood that the rules in Lancashire do not apply to Blackpool because it is a unitary authority with a different health authority to other parts of Lancashire. A government source told the Guardian the health authority had decided tougher restrictions did not need to be implemented as its infection rate is slightly lower than other parts of the county.
The rules apply to residents in Oadby and Wigston in Leicestershire and in Wolverhampton in the West Midlands, who will be banned from socialising with people outside of their households or support bubble in private homes and gardens.
Individuals who are shielding in Leicester city will no longer need to from 5 October.
The rules in West Yorkshire apply to people in all parts of Bradford, Kirklees and Calderdale, where socialising outside of households or social bubbles in private homes or gardens will also be banned.
North-eastFrom Friday 18 September, households in Northumberland, North Tyneside, South Tyneside, Newcastle upon Tyne, Gateshead, Sunderland and County Durham are banned from socialising with other people outside their household or support bubble in private homes or gardens.
There is also a 10pm-5am curfew on leisure and entertainment venues including pubs and restaurants, while food and drink outlets are restricted to table service only.
BirminghamSince Tuesday 15 September, different households in Birmingham, Sandwell and Solihull have been banned from meeting each other in private homes and gardens unless they are part of a support bubble.
Greater ManchesterThe rules in Greater Manchester apply to the city of Manchester, Trafford, Oldham, Bury, Bolton, Tameside, Rochdale and Salford.
Residents are banned from meeting other households (excluding support bubbles) in private homes or gardens, including outside of the affected areas.
The rule also applies to indoor public venues such as pubs, restaurants and cafes.
Residents should not visit family or friends in care homes, other than in exceptional circumstances.
A maximum of 20 people can attend wedding celebrations and receptions in the form of a sit-down meal.
In Bolton, extra restrictions apply, including the closure of pubs and restaurants, with takeaway service available only. All venues are subject to a 10pm to 5am curfew, while care home and hospital visits are tightly restricted.Bowling alleys, skating rinks, casinos, exhibition centres and close contact services such as eyebrow threading are also prevented from reopening.
LeicesterLeicester was the first UK area to have a local lockdown imposed on 29 June, and some restrictions still apply. Residents must not meet people from different households, excluding support bubbles, in a private home or garden, including outside Leicester.
This article was amended on 22 September 2020 to make it clear that socialising outside of households or social bubbles will not be totally banned in West Yorkshire and the north-east, but in private homes or gardens. It was further amended on 29 September 2020 to clarify that it is in Bolton that bowling alleys, skating rinks, casinos, exhibition centres and close contact services such as eyebrow threading are prevented from reopening.