Don't stop your grousing … and other Covid rule-of-six exemptions
Shooting is not the only activity that can go ahead in England in groups of more than six
When the government announced that grouse shooting would be exempt from the "rule of six" coronavirus restrictions in England, it prompted widespread scorn.
While two families stopping in the street to chat was described as illegal mingling by the home secretary, Priti Patel, parties of up to 30 are permitted to meet for shooting and hunting trips, after a ministerial intervention ensured it would be classed as a licensed outdoor activity.
But it is not the only activity exempt from the rule of six.
The rule of six does not apply to organised activities that abide by Covid-secure guidance and that includes casino games, according to the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport.
This means that while a group of seven might be unable to get a table in a restaurant, they can all get a seat at a poker table, provided there is a screen between each seat – and the chips are wiped down regularly, of course.
Updated guidance states that museums can continue to host tours of up to 30 people, provided safety measures are in place.
"Guided tours of up to 30 people may take place indoors or outdoors provided businesses undertake risk assessments […] and put any necessary mitigations in place," the regulations state.
So, while a big birthday party at the park might be a no-no for now, history buffs can gather their mates for a tour of interesting artefacts.
If history is not your cup of tea, but large-scale event planning is, then you could arrange a tour of your nearest conference venue.
"Exhibition and conference centres are also allowed to show small groups (of up to 30 people, with social distancing requirements) around to view the facilities and plan future events," the guidance says.
At a press conference, Boris Johnson confirmed that places of worship were exempt from the rule, provided there were no individual groups larger than six.
The archbishop of Canterbury tweeted: "After contact with government we hear that there is no change to guidance on places of worship. Worship is the work of God – not a social gathering – and gives the strength to love and serve."