South Wales outbreak no longer blamed on 'Doncaster races trip'
Welsh health authority contradicts government's suggestion and accepts sports club's group 'did not enter racecourse'
A reported trip to Doncaster races by a group of sports fans from south Wales is no longer being blamed for a cluster of Covid-19 cases in an area where a new, strict lockdown is being imposed.
Almost a quarter of a million people in Rhondda Cynon Taf (RCT) have been told that from Thursday they will not be able to leave the area without a reasonable excuse following a sharp rise in coronavirus cases.
The Welsh government had said that one of the clusters was associated "with a club outing to the Doncaster races, which stopped off at a series of pubs on the way".
But late on Wednesday night, the Welsh government's health and social care department tweeted: "Regarding concerns that a coach party from South Wales attended Doncaster Race Course over the weekend, we understand that though the original intention of the party was to travel to the Doncaster Racecourse, the party did not enter the racecourse as originally planned."
The statement followed a similiar one from the British Horseracing Authority (BHA), which said: "The BHA has been told by Public Health Wales (PHW) tonight that a coach party from South Wales … did not visit Doncaster racecourse as reported.
"PHW confirmed that no contact had been made with Doncaster racecourse because the group had not attended the pilot event last Wednesday, the first day of the St Leger festival. PHW expect a formal clarification will be provided by the Welsh government as soon as possible."
Doncaster Racecourse earlier said it did not have any ticket bookings from the south Wales area for Wednesday's event. It also revealed that it had not been contacted by the NHS or the Welsh government over the cluster.
In a statement, the racecourse said: "As a condition of running the pilot event last week, we were required to implement a full track-and-trace database that took the details of all attendees that would be on site, linked to an e-ticket and photo ID system on entry that would verify attendance.
"Doncaster Racecourse has received no contact from any organisation, including the NHS or the Welsh government, to verify the attendance of any individuals at last week's event for the purposes of track and trace. In addition, we do not have any ticket bookings for any groups from the south Wales area for Wednesday's event. We will be contacting the Welsh health minister as a matter of urgency to clarify the situation."
The UK government had been criticised for allowing the Cheltenham festival to go ahead in March, shortly before the national lockdown. Other clusters in RCT are associated with a rugby club and pub.
A range of new measures will come into force in the county from 6pm on Thursday including all licensed premises having to close at 11pm. The Welsh government said people will only be able to meet outdoors for the time being.
The Welsh government's health minister, Vaughan Gething, said: "We have seen a rapid rise in cases in Rhondda Cynon Taf in a very short space of time, linked to people socialising indoors and not following social distancing guidelines. We now have evidence of wider community transmission in the borough."
The latest figures show the rolling seven-day new case rate is 82.1 per 100,000 people in Rhondda Cynon Taf. On Tuesday, the testing positivity rate was 4.3% – the highest in Wales.
Contact-tracing teams have been able to trace about half of the cases back to a series of clusters in the borough. The rest are linked to community transmission.
Gething said pubs had been a "real factor" in the spread of coronavirus in the area. He said a licensed premise had been closed in Tonypandy, and improvement notices had been issued for a bar in Pontypridd and a barber's in Tonypandy.
A further 50 licensed premises were visited by council officers over the weekend and more enforcement action – either improvement notices or closure orders – is likely to follow.
The Rhondda MP, Chris Bryant, said: "I've been warning this would be necessary. Now we need to stick to the rules and get the transmission rate down to protect the NHS and the most vulnerable."