Herd immunity in California? A Stanford expert on why we're nowhere close
Dr Yvonne Maldonado explains why claims about early spread have been overblown and misleading – and what the data actually shows
California saw its first coronavirus death in early March but some local health officials have suggested it was spreading far earlier than anyone knew, with the chief executive of Santa Clara county recently positing the "virus was freewheeling in our community and probably has been here for quite some time".
This has raised questions about immunity in the population and what that means for how California moves forward. At Stanford University, located in Silicon Valley, researchers have been tracking early spread by pooling samples from patients with upper respiratory symptoms. In an initial study, the scientists found the presence of Covid-19 before mid-February was low; only two out of nearly 3,000 people with respiratory symptoms in early 2020 were later found to have had Covid-19.
Dr Yvonne Maldonado, epidemiologist and infectious disease specialist at Stanford Medicine, explained why the claims about early spread have been overblown and misleading – and what the data actually shows. This conversation has been edited and condensed for clarity.
Some have suggested there was an early surge of coronavirus circulating in the community in California before March. What do we know?
I don't believe that, and I don't have any evidence of that happening. That opinion seems to be based on pure conjecture. The data that I have seen does not suggest that there was a surge in February. We didn't have a coronavirus test until 4 March. So I don't know how you could make a surge diagnosis. There was a possibility that there may have been people infected before that time, because we didn't have a test. But with the testing that was available, we didn't really start seeing positives until the very end of February and then ramping up in March.
Dr Jeff Smith, a physician and chief executive of Santa Clara county in Silicon Valley, recently said there were possibly cases in December. What do you make of that?
In December, it's possible there were some early cases, but a massive surge, that's different. There could have been stray cases here and there. We are on the Pacific Rim. But we weren't testing back then. And even if we tested them now and found that they had antibodies [meaning they previously had the virus], we wouldn't be able to know when they got that antibody. It's something they have now and we can't tell when it showed up. I don't know that we'll know the answer to that.
Based on current information, I don't think there was a surge in the fall. We also had a high-level flu season with documented influenza disease. This is a time of year when we see lots of respiratory viruses, and we actually diagnosed those.
What does this mean for immunity in California?
We're not "immune" in California, because we're already starting to get antibody tests, and we don't have a high rate of antibody prevalence in just the few tests that have been run. In the coming weeks, we plan to use our own Stanford tests to look at antibody levels, and we're just not going to see very high levels. As devastating as this epidemic is, around the world we estimate that about 5% or less of people have actually been infected.
If you look at Johns Hopkins data, we've done more than 3m tests, and we've only found about 20% of those to be positive. But the people who have been tested are generally symptomatic. If you test more people, including those who are asymptomatic, you may find that the percentage is going to be on the order of 0.5% to 1-2% overall. That's what we anticipate will be the case here. As time goes on perhaps that number will go up, but it's not expected that number will go much higher because of shelter in place.
So how do we move forward?
With a disease like this, you probably need somewhere on the order of 60% or more people to have immunity in order to prevent an epidemic. Right now, if we're at less than 5%; you would need at least ten- to twelve-fold that level. The only way to get there is to vaccinate people or else have horrific transmissions, and we can't do the latter. So we're going to have to continue some social distancing efforts.
Is there a way to transition to a system that is less restrictive than our current sheltering, but allows us to avoid those horrific transmissions?
Absolutely. There's a lot that can be done. We won't be back to where we were before this right away. But we will be able to start staggering work hours, either by days, people working from home certain days a week, staggering shifts, other mitigation efforts, making sure people are socially distant. And then we need really rigorous testing and contact tracing.
Cases do start tapering off eventually, but what we need to be careful of is when a second wave comes along, which it will, keep it more like a ripple rather than a wave. And extinguish those small outbreaks quickly by identifying infected individuals and making sure their contacts isolate and don't transmit to others. That's what we need to get everyone back to work. And over time, we can start staging out less and less restrictive containment practices.