California enters 'optimistic' phase but coronavirus restrictions won't ease soon
As residents hope for return to normal amid promising signs, governor says state can't make mistake of 'pulling plug too early'
California is preparing to enter a new "optimistic" phase of the coronavirus crisis, but when the state will reopen and return to normal operations is still unclear, Gavin Newsom, California's governor, said on Tuesday.
Newsom provided a pragmatic glimpse into the future of the state on Tuesday, admitting that though there was no specific timeline for when he will lift the stay-at-home order, "there is a ray of optimism that this too shall pass".
Californians have been under strict stay-at-home orders for nearly a month, after the state became one of the first to shutter all non-essential businesses and tell its 40 million residents to shelter in place. But the rate of new hospitalizations has slowed, and the death toll has remained low relative to far worse-hit spots, such as New York, promoting hope that an easing of restrictions could be on the horizon. While local counties' shelter-in-place orders had end dates of 3 May, California's shelter-in-place order is in place indefinitely.
The governor called this phase "perhaps the most difficult and challenging phase of all", one where "we begin to transition into suppression, ultimately on our way to herd immunity and ultimately to a vaccine".
"This phase is one where science, where public health, not politics, must be the guide," Newsom said.
While declining to offer a timeline as to when residents could expect the stay-at-home order to be modified, he outlined the six indicators that the state must consider before doing so:
The ability to expand testing and address contact tracing, isolating and supporting those who are positive or exposed.
The ability to protect the most vulnerable populations – seniors, the homeless and those with underlying medical conditions – from infection and spread.
The ability of the hospital and health systems to handle surges.
The ability to develop therapeutics to meet the demand.
The ability for businesses, schools, parks, playgrounds, childcare facilities and coastlines to support physical distancing.
The ability to determine when to reinstitute "more vigorous controls", such as the stay-at-home orders, if necessary.
The governor unveiled the plan as the state experienced a record number of Covid-19-related deaths – 71 in one day, bringing the total to 758. State models still predict that California will experience its peak in hospitalizations mid-May. "We are sober about the fact that we're still seeing in increase, modest though it may be, in hospitalizations," Newsom said. "We are not out of the woods yet. We are not spiking the ball yet. But we are also acknowledging that this is not going to be a permanent state."
Newsom warned that even when he modifies the order and the state is allowed to return to "normal", the new normal may still be different. Waiters at restaurants may wear masks and gloves. Gatherings of more than 100 will still be unlikely without a vaccine. "There's no light switch here," he said. "I would argue it's more like a dimmer."
He predicted in two weeks, should the state see a continual decline in hospitalizations, he may have a better idea of when he may begin modifying the order.
"We can't get ahead of ourselves," Newsom said. "Let's not make a mistake of pulling the plug too early, as much as we all want to. I don't want to make a political decision that puts people's lives at risk, puts the economy at risk."
There were 24,329 positive cases in California on Tuesday.