Coronavirus threatens survival of US rural hospitals on frontlines of crisis
Closures would leave communities vulnerable to the impact of the virus with fewer hospital beds and fewer options
On Wednesday, Three Rivers, a small hospital in rural Washington, had exactly nine days left before it would run out of money to pay its staff and be forced to close. That same day, its CEO learned the hospital probably had its first coronavirus patient.
The coronavirus pandemic has put a strain even on the wealthier parts of America's vast, fragmented healthcare system: there are not enough beds, not enough ventilators, not enough protective equipment. But in rural communities, the stakes are different: not whether there will be enough beds at the local hospital, but whether the local hospital will be able to stay open at all.
Like many American families, rural hospitals in the United States have been operating paycheck to paycheck for years, never making enough money to save up for an emergency. Now, the pandemic is threatening the survival of many rural hospitals, which would leave communities particularly vulnerable to the impact of the virus with fewer hospital beds and fewer options.
At least three rural hospitals have announced abrupt closures in recent weeks, including one in Wellington, Kansas, and two in West Virginia, leaving local residents and healthcare providers scrambling to make new plans for the pandemic.
Three Rivers hospital, in a remote area of Washington state near the border with Canada, has been at the frontlines of the crisis.
The hospital serves about 15,000 people scattered over 2,500 sq miles (about 6,400 sq km), according to its CEO, Scott Graham. Its surrounding  towns are tiny: one or two grocery stores, one gas station. "We think of it as more frontier than rural," Graham said.
Three Rivers hospital had scraped by for years with a smaller-than-optimal staff and careful economizing, he said. Then, Washington became the first state with a confirmed case of coronavirus, and a confirmed coronavirus death.
Once social distancing guidelines were put in place, including guidelines to stop elective surgeries, "our source of revenue basically stopped", Graham said. Patients who would typically visit the hospital for non-coronavirus-related health issues now seemed reluctant to come in. The volume of emergency room visits dropped. So did primary care. "What little cash we had evaporated," Graham said.
By late March, Graham, who had been the hospital's CEO for six years, was starting to plan for something he had never done before: shutting down a hospital that no longer had enough money to function.
On 20 March, the state's hospital association wrote to the governor, Jay Inslee, warning that five rural hospitals, including Three Rivers, were "facing imminent closure".
The response from Washington state officials was swift, Graham said. Within hours of raising his concerns, he was on the phone with Sue Birch, a former nurse who had spent decades living in rural Colorado and now runs Washington state's healthcare authority.
Birch said she promised Graham that they would find a way to get the hospital through the crisis.
"We can talk about closures later," she recalled telling him. "Right now, I need you holding my frontline."
Losing a hospital is a serious blow to rural communities, whose residents are disproportionately older, and often struggle with existing health conditions. While Three Rivers does not have an intensive care unit (ICU), it's a place to go for immediate care, for health problems small and large, that's not an hour or more away.
A hospital closure also has a huge economic toll, since in towns with "a school and a Walmart and a church and a post office", as Birch put it, a small local hospital may be one of the major local employers. And it has ripple effects far beyond the rural areas the hospital directly serves.
"We have to remind ourselves that we are all in this together," Birch said. Rural areas "are where our food is produced. We urban areas need them, and they need us."
Amid the coronavirus pandemic, rural hospitals play a critical role.
As urban hospitals brace for a wave of seriously ill coronavirus patients, Three Rivers has been planning to use its beds to take in the overflow of other patients from those larger hospitals, helping the state hospital system as a whole stay afloat, Graham said.
While Three Rivers could provide about one or two patients with ventilators, Graham said, it does not have a formal ICU, or staff trained to work with ICU patients. But it will help take in and stabilize more seriously ill coronavirus patients before sending them to a larger hospital, with more advanced equipment, about an hour away.
It can only do any of these things if its own doors stay open.
The first financial lifeline for Three Rivers came from Washington state, which sent an emergency $2m out to a small group of struggling rural hospitals in March. Three Rivers got about $200,000.
But keeping the hospital running costs roughly $1m a month, Graham said, with payroll for staff alone costing at least $700,000 a month. The emergency funds from the state, although helpful, only pushed the hospital's money crisis back about two weeks.
As he was trying to secure protective gear for hospital staff and prepare for a surge of coronavirus patients, Graham also made desperate calls to lawmakers and journalists, trying to secure enough cash to make it through the hospital's next payday.
Meanwhile, Birch, the state healthcare administrator, tried to work with federal healthcare authorities to open up more emergency money for rural hospitals in her state, and in others.
The federal government's lifeline for struggling hospitals, announced on 27 March, would send Three Rivers and other financially vulnerable hospitals an advance of three months of their typical payments for Medicare, the federally funded health insurance program for senior citizens.
That advance funding would allow the hospital to pay its staff at least through the spring and summer, until about early August. By then, Graham hopes, the virus will be more under control, and more normal hospital care, and the income from patients getting that care, will resume.
Three Rivers submitted the paperwork for the Medicare advance on Wednesday, Graham said. Federal authorities told hospitals that they anticipated they could send out the payments within seven days.
The next day payroll for the hospitals' roughly 100 employees is Friday. If the payment comes as quickly as promised, he said, "We'll be OK."
Still, Graham worries about the consequences of even a brief bureaucratic delay.
That's a fear shared by rural health experts, said George Pink, the deputy director of North Carolina rural health research program at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
"If a hospital misses payroll once, that can be the death knell," Pink said. "You're telling the community and the vendors and the staff that you're on the ropes."
At least 128 rural hospitals have shut down in the past decade alone, according to data assembled by the rural health research program.
There may be more substantial federal help on the way for rural hospitals at the brink of closure. Congress's $2.2tn emergency relief bill includes $100bn for hospitals. But how that money will be distributed and, again, how fast it will go out, is still not clear on the ground.
"The details have been really, really sparse," Graham said.
Birch said she is optimistic that the safety net for rural hospitals will hold through the pandemic. Emergency payments from the federal government should come reliably within seven days, if hospitals apply for them, she said.
As of Friday night, Three Rivers still had not received the Covid-19 testing results for the first patient who had been showing symptoms that had initially seemed consistent with coronavirus. Test results, like emergency funding, were still coming very slowly, when they came at all.
But one thing was clear: the number of confirmed coronavirus cases across the rural county was rising. On Wednesday, it had just been three, Graham said. On Friday, it was six.