Florida man who raised funds for border wall hawks millions of face masks
Brian Kolfage and other brokers around the world claim to have access to N95 masks outside normal supply channels
Brian Kolfage, a Florida military veteran, recently convinced Americans to donate millions of dollars for a privately built wall on the US-Mexico border.
Now he has jumped into a new venture: hawking millions of protective face masks that are in critically short supply during the coronavirus pandemic.
About a month ago, Kolfage formed a business called America First Medical, which offers on its website and in social media pitches to broker large-volume sales of high-grade masks known as N95s. He said he charges about $4 each – several times the pre-pandemic prices but a few dollars less than some hospitals, nursing homes and first responders are now paying.
Though he hasn't yet found buyers, Kolfage says he has found masks all over the world, including stockpiles hidden away in warehouses in Japan and eastern Europe. If a deal goes through, he will collect a commission between 1% and 3%, depending on the size of the order, he said.
He said he was performing a public service. "We're the ones out there kissing the frogs and doing all the work that these hospitals and others can't do," Kolfage, 38, told Reuters. "We're the ones making these connections. If the hospital wants to pay the money, that's up to them."
Kolfage aims to be one of the new mask middlemen. As Covid-19 has spread around the world, an improvised, chaotic market has sprung up. Brokers claim to have access to tens or even hundreds of millions of masks generally outside the normal supply channels and at prices much higher than the former retail price of about $1 each.
High-volume deals – even with low-percentage commissions – could bring big paydays for the middlemen.
But the frenzy also has broken down standard quality controls, opening the market to an influx of masks of uncertain origin and effectiveness, medical suppliers and healthcare industry officials say.
As supplies run ever lower, hospitals and nursing homes are being deluged with offers, and some say they have no choice but to pursue the promising leads while hoping to sidestep the scams.
The hot commodity in the mask trade is the N95 device, sturdier than surgical masks and better able to filter out much smaller particles such as the coronavirus.
Reuters spoke to five new mask brokers, three in the United States and two in China, which is the world's largest mask manufacturer and accounts for about half of global production. These middlemen described a wild marketplace.
Jake Mei, an owner of a pump supply firm in Houston, Texas, said in one LinkedIn posting that he had 8m masks, two models made by industrial giant the 3M Company, for sale, at $4.10 to $4.20 a mask. "Good price and quick delivery!" he promised. In an interview, however, he said he was having trouble finding inventory.
None of the middlemen would disclose suppliers or customers, and Reuters could not independently confirm their access to vast stashes.
Kolfage told Reuters that the masks he finds – which he says are not from China – are of good quality, certified by the US Food and Drug Administration. And he was not price gouging, he said, but rather charging a commission far lower than other brokers.
Reuters is aware of prices higher than his, including those that New York's governor, Andrew Cuomo, recently said had risen from 85 cents to $7 apiece, making a crisis situation harder to manage.
On 23 March, Donald Trump signed an executive order prohibiting hoarding and price gouging of medical supplies, and the attorney general, William Barr, said the justice department had launched a national taskforce to investigate such schemes.
A US Department of Justice spokesman declined to comment on the mask trade.
Some mask brokers appear to be counterfeiters or selling substandard knock-offs, according to a major manufacturer, 3M of St Paul, Minnesota, and a major hospital supplier, Premier Inc, of Charlotte, North Carolina.
Chaun Powell, Premier's vice-president of strategic supplier engagement, said solicitations were pouring in and some customers take a punt: "It really demonstrates the level of desperation in our supply chain. They're trying to evaluate which is better – to have a faulty mask or no mask."
Kolfage and other brokers told Reuters they are running clean operations.
Kolfage is a newcomer to the mask market.
A US air force veteran who lives with his family in Florida, Kolfage lost his legs and right arm in a rocket attack during the Iraq war. After owning and selling rightwing news websites, he set up a fundraiser that capitalized on Trump's quest to build a barrier on the southern border called We Build the Wall. The effort pulled in $25m from donors starting in December 2018.
So far, Kolfage has built two wall sections on private land, in New Mexico and Texas. He said he did not take any compensation for a year but now is now being paid $10,000 a month as president of the not-for-profit running the wall project.
In his new venture, he said, it's all about speed. On 3 March, the day his website was registered, Kolfage posted a picture on Instagram of piles of boxes labeled 3M sitting in a warehouse, saying he had 300m N95s available to ship to the United States.
"Trying to reach the US government and arm up our docs with the proper equipment. Message me please," he wrote, tagging Trump and the Department of Homeland Security.
The supplies, Kolfage said, were owned by a wealthy businessman who wanted to sell the whole lot for $3 each out of Japan and triple his investment. US giant 3M said Kolfage is not one of the company's authorized dealers.