Covid: concerns raised over plan for mass testing of students
Agreement yet to be reached with universities as clock ticks towards Christmas 'travel window'
Concerns have been raised about government plans for mass Covid-19 testing of students before Christmas, with agreement yet to be reached with universities and one warning it would be impossible to test every student.
With the clock ticking down to a designated six-day "travel window" which students will be asked to use, ongoing talks between civil servants and vice-chancellors are trying to hammer out issues such as whether independent testing already in place at universities can be aligned with the plan.
The universities minister, Michelle Donelan, also sought to downplay concerns raised by experts about the reliability of the plan's self-administered lateral flow tests (LFT), and the short period of time in which testing will take place. Her department is still unable to provide the number of tests that will be available but said it is expected that they will be available for those who want one.
Details also emerged of how Wales and Scotland might fit into plans announced in London on Tuesday by the Department for Education for a mass exodus to take place, on staggered departure dates set by universities, from 3 December to 9 December after England's four-week lockdown.
The Scottish government's higher education minister, Richard Lochhead, told the Holyrood parliament on Wednesday that students would be offered two rapid tests, five days apart, with those testing negative on both occasions able to travel home. Those who test positive will have a more sensitive 'PCR' test, used in the main coronavirus testing programme, to confirm the result.
Student infection rates were declining, said Lochhead, and in the last week students contributed to only 2% of the national total.
The Welsh education minister emphasised that university students would not be forced to take new rapid coronavirus tests before returning home for Christmas but would be offered the chance to "make a positive choice" in taking up the offer of a test 24 hours before they plan to leave towns and cities.
Swansea University, which will end in-person teaching on 4 December, said it hoped to take part and had been told tests would be ready to use as early as 30 November.
But Andrew Rhodes, chief operating officer, warned it would be "impossible" to test every student. He said students would have to be tested twice with a three-day gap between the first and second test and "in practice, it would be impossible to test all students before they travel home given the very tight timescales".
Among others seeking clarity from the government were the National Union of Students, which sought assurances on support for students remaining on campus, and Unison, which called for details of how staff would be trained to carry out the tests.
"The whole testing process must be risk-assessed and properly supervised if it's to be effective," said Unison senior national education officer, Ruth Levin.
"Many students will need repeat testing if their results are inconclusive. Sufficient funding must be in place for universities so this programme can be carried out safely."
Caution was also advised by experts about the potential reach of LFTs. The self-administered tests, which can deliver a result in as little as 30 minutes, are rapid but do not necessarily detect as many infected people as the PCR testing used at NHS sites, warned Dr Ellen Brooks Pollock, a lecturer in infectious disease modelling at the University of Bristol, who has led research into Covid-19 among students.
"We saw high rates of infection in university students at the beginning of term and that number has fallen but we can't really disentangle testing behaviour with true infection rate," she told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.
"It's because the majority of students don't have the typical Covid symptoms so there could potentially be high rates of undisclosed infections, which obviously poses a risk to their parents and grandparents but also to seeding infections in new areas."
Prof Jacqui Ramagge, an executive dean for science at Durham University who has been overseeing a pilot project there for rapid Covid-19 testing, added that the danger of failing to pick up students who could become infectious later could be mitigated by taking a number of tests over a few days.
However, Donelan said the lateral flow rapid test was "highly reliable".
The plan envisages a week of testing between 30 November and 6 December, ending a few days after the lockdown in England is due to finish. Donelan confirmed that students would be going back to campus after Christmas.
Talks around each part of the UK are continuing between government officials and universities, which have been seeking assurances on funding and protections from being sued before committing to the plans.
Donelan added: "Our target will be for those universities that have had higher infection rates or areas that have higher R rates, also areas that have higher percentages of more vulnerable [people] such as BAME, but fundamental to this plan is that the four weeks of national restrictions mean that the risk these students pose is now much reduced, so that unlocks the opportunity to then go home and feel a lot safer in doing so."