Social workers' efforts to protect children in lockdown have gone unnoticed
As one of the only professions to continue doing home visits, social workers alone can not keep children safe from harm
The news that the numbers of babies in England that have suffered serious injury or neglect during the pandemic has increased by a fifth compared with the same period last year and eight have died from their injuries has been met with understandable shock and public concern. It is perhaps all the more shocking because so little public attention has been given to child protection during the coronavirus lockdown and particularly to what is happening to babies and children who aren't old enough to be at school.
The same public invisibility applies to social work, the only profession consistently going into homes since the pandemic began to try to safeguard children and help families.
In our study, we have been researching the impact of Covid-19 on child protection since the first lockdown. We have interviewed 40 social work staff from four local authorities in different regions in England every month since April. We have tracked the impact of the virus on their work with particular families and interviewed parents. The data we have gathered over the past seven months shows how health visiting, early help and therapeutic services that normally support young children and parents have retreated from homes and either gone online or stopped altogether.
While schools have often done a great deal for pupils' families and the police visit in emergency situations, the net result is that social workers have often ended up being the sole agency going into homes.
This has all been in the interests of social distancing and preventing the spread of coronavirus. If possible, the preferred approach is for professionals to remain outside, on doorsteps or in gardens, but where the risks to the children are assessed as high, social workers continue to visit in person by entering the home.
But the risks to professionals are not being evenly spread. Social workers from our four English research sites have questioned why they are being expected to enter homes where families are locked down when others are not. Research shows that just one in 10 parents of children in the UK under two saw a health visitor face-to-face during the first lockdown.
For black and minority ethnic families and workers the risks and worries of the consequences of catching the virus from encounters on home visits are greater still.
Social workers tell us they have been visiting homes throughout the pandemic because they are driven by their professional ethics and commitment to having close relationships with children and families, despite the risk of catching the virus and spreading it to their own families. As one social worker put it: "Children being safe is as important as Covid. I can't not go into houses, I can't not see children on their own."
Social workers have adopted a broad definition of "safety", which has seen them providing families living in poverty with food, toys, learning materials and help with energy bills. They have authoritatively placed boundaries around teenagers at high risk of criminal and sexual exploitation, challenged men who are perpetrating domestic abuse, and addressed the complex combination of trauma, addiction and mental health difficulties that frequently undermine women's parenting and result in child neglect.
They have found it is impossible to maintain social distancing on many home visits. The properties families live in can often be so small there is no room to stay 2 metres apart. And young children do not understand the need for social distancing.
So social workers have routinely had children sitting on their knee, climbing all over them, giving them full hugs, holding their hands, hugging their legs or arms, and sucking their hair. And they have welcomed it.
However, babies cannot initiate physical contact. The use of PPE means that risks from the virus can be mitigated and has enabled social workers to get close enough to establish how safe babies are and to support vulnerable parents in meeting their child's needs.
There are very high expectations on professionals and social workers in particular to keep children safe and they are strongly criticised by politicians and the public if they don't and children die – as cases such as "Baby Peter" Connolly show.
So social workers in our study have been disappointed that, unlike other health and social care practitioners, their efforts, sacrifices and successes at helping the most vulnerable during the pandemic have gone completely unrecognised.
More will be achieved if vulnerable children and families are provided with support, not just from social workers, but from health, early help and therapeutic services, using a combination of virtual and in-person visiting and seeing families outside of the home.
What is needed for lockdown 2 is for families to receive ongoing help with food poverty, energy bills, nappies and other essentials and a sharper focus on getting close to babies and children of all ages.
A coordinated interagency approach to seeing families face to face is vital to prevent neglect or abuse. During this second lockdown, our research shows that social workers alone should not be expected to keep at-risk children safe from harm.
Harry Ferguson is professor of social work and Laura Kelly is a research fellow at the department of social work and social care, University of Birmingham. Sarah Pink is an anthropologist and a professor of design and emerging technologies at the University of Melbourne, Australia