Siena Castellon: 'Autistic people are really struggling with how uncertain things are'
The 18-year-old autism campaigner and international children's peace prize finalist on why diagnosis of the condition for girls urgently needs improving
Each morning Siena Castellon synchronises her morning routine to music with the same 30-minute playlist. Different songs act as time markers. "The trick is to choose music you love and to listen to the same playlist every day," explains the teenager.
When Wonderwall by Oasis comes on she knows she should be brushing her teeth. By the time Summertime Sadness by Lana Del Rey is playing she is walking out the door.
As an autistic person, Castellon values a schedule and is most at ease with life when things are meticulously planned. So the unpredictable nature of the last eight months has been challenging to say the least, not only for the 18-year-old but for the dozens of young people with learning difficulties she mentors through her online platform Quantum Leap.
Castellon, who has ADHD, dyslexia and dyspraxia as well as autism, set up the mentoring forum in 2016 when she was just 13, after struggling to find age-appropriate support. It has since grown to reach 1,533 subscribers globally and Castellon supports up to 10 children a week via email, as well as parents seeking advice.
"The new [national] lockdown measures are causing lot of anxiety for people like me," she says. "It's difficult to wake up one morning and be told you can't leave your house or go to school."
"Autistic people are really struggling with how uncertain things are. One mentee constantly asks me what is happening with lockdown and I have to tell them I have no idea how long this will last."
Others who contact her have received abuse for not wearing masks on public transport even though those with autism are exempt because face coverings can trigger anxiety.
As well as mentoring, Castellon is also a campaigner for children's rights. In November 2018 the teenager launched Neurodiversity Celebration Week. The campaign encourages schools and universities to celebrate the talents of children with learning differences. More than 580,000 students from 850 learning institutes around the world take part.
Now her efforts have been recognised as one of three finalists to be considered for the prestigious international children's peace prize.
She was selected from 142 nominees from 42 different countries acknowledged for promoting children's rights. Previous winners include Greta Thunberg and Malala Yousafzai who will award the prize in a remote ceremony on 13 November.
Autism is diagnosed in around 1% of the population, but because it is a hidden disability, a much greater proportion of people are believed to have the condition. Castellon also believes gender stereotypes are an issue and that had she been a boy, her autism would have been picked up much earlier.
The most recent research suggests the male to female ratio of those with autism is 3:1. But boys are more likely to be diagnosed due to stereotypes surrounding the condition.
"I talk to a lot of autistic people," says Castellon. "The men all tell me they were diagnosed at four or five. The women often say they were diagnosed in their 40s or when one of their children was diagnosed. I actually think there are an equal number of men and women who are autistic."
Castellon always sensed she was different from other children. "I was an old soul as a kid, I had no patience for make-believe and playing," she recalls. "Other kids wanted to run around and play games, which stressed me out because of my sensory processing disorder [SPD]."
For Castellon everything is brighter and louder and touch is amplified.
"As I got older some social issues I was having become more noticeable. I found it hard to maintain friendships and was bullied and ostracised."
It wasn't until she was 12 that Castellon got a diagnosis, following a spell of extreme anxiety. "I could hear the electricity in the walls and my own heartbeat," she remembers. "It got to the point where I couldn't go outside and my mother took me to the doctor. Looking back, I'm shocked it wasn't flagged earlier."
Castellon thought the diagnosis would make her life easier, but it didn't. "There was a moment when I thought I would be understood and accepted but nothing changed." She continued to be bullied and unsupported by teachers at school. She moved school 11 times in search of one that would not only accept her for who she was but that would sufficiently challenge her as an academically gifted student. Castellon is good at maths (she got four A* GCSEs at the age of 14) and plans to study physics at university. But she acknowledges that not everyone with autism is so gifted.
"It's a spectrum and there is a real range," she says. "It is time to take apart these misconceptions because it prevents diagnosis. There are autistic people who excel in art or history."
The government needs to prioritise addressing the "obscenely long" autism diagnostic assessment waiting times, she insists.
"The pandemic is increasing the chasm of inequality and hitting society's most vulnerable communities the hardest. Our government continues to fail the autistic community and people with learning differences."
Significant diagnosis delays deny children the benefits of an early diagnosis, negatively impacting their access to education, and can lead to mental health issues, such as severe anxiety, explains Castellon.
"I hope our government finally takes the necessary action to ensure that the disabled community is treated with dignity and respect instead of as second-class citizens who are not worthy of funding and support."
Castellon also finds the representation of autism in film and media unhelpful.
Not only is female representation lacking but autistic characters are commonly played by neurotypical actors (someone not on the autistic spectrum), such as Keir Gilchrist who plays Sam Gardner in the Netflix series, Atypical.
"This happens a lot," says Castellon. "Even when it comes to telling our own stories, we are not included in the narrative".
Growing up, much of the advice for autistic girls was written by male academics in their 40s, claims Castellon. It drove her to write The Spectrum Girl's Survival Guide: How to Grow up Awesome and Autistic, published earlier this year. It covers bullying, dating, and other challenges unique to autistic teenage girls.
One recent study found girls with autism are not being diagnosed because they are adept at camouflaging their behaviour – known as masking – in an effort to fit in.
As a child, Castellon says she was known as the girl who didn't smile. "I didn't have facial expressions and I didn't make eye contact, which people made the biggest deal about."
The idea of celebrating the differences among the neurodiverse community rather than focusing on the challenges they face is the driving idea behind Siena's schools' campaign.
"When I was diagnosed with dyslexia I was told you are not going to be able to spell, I wasn't told 60% of all entrepreneurs are dyslexic. It's really damaging to feel your difference is a burden rather than something to be celebrated."
If she wins the prize this week she hopes she will receive some funding to donate to charities of her choice.
"There are organisations doing work to try and cure autism, which just adds to the stigma. I would give the money to those groups that celebrate and give a voice to young autistic people."