GP clinics in England to administer at least 975 Covid vaccines a week
Plan for dedicated practices to run from 8am to 8pm seven days a week
Dedicated GP clinics are being established to each deliver nearly 1,000 Covid-19 vaccines a week in England, according to an official document, as the health secretary, Matt Hancock, declared he was confident the NHS would be ready to "inject hope into millions of arms this winter".
Although Hancock has sounded a note of caution by warning a vaccine was not yet over the line, he has revealed that he has primed the NHS, supported by the armed forces, to be ready from the start of December for rollout.
It comes as it emerged that NHS England has told its 1,250 primary care networks to designate a single practice to administer vaccines in their area capable of operating during 12-hour shifts, from 8am to 8pm, seven days a week.
In a letter setting out the rollout strategy, which will be based on plans for a flu vaccine, NHS England said it was planning to be ready from December and practices would need to be able to deliver a "minimum of 975 doses per week or greater". In a separate letter, clinics have been notified that an extra £150m is being ploughed into general practice as part of a "Covid capacity expansion fund" to help until March next year.
It follows widespread optimism after it was announced on Monday that an interim analysis indicated that Pfizer/BioNTech's Covid vaccine was 90% effective in protecting people from transmission of the virus in global trials. Priority for a vaccine will go to people in care homes, elderly people and social care staff.
Meanwhile, figures released on Tuesday showed that one in eight deaths in England and Wales were coronavirus-related. According to the Office for Nationals statistics (ONS), there were 1,379 fatalities mentioning "novel coronavirus" registered in the week ending 30 October, representing 12.7% of all deaths.
Speaking in the Commons on Tuesday, Hancock told MPs "the best way to liberate and to get life closer to normal is a vaccine" but he also sounded a note of caution.
"We do not have a vaccine yet but we are one step closer," Hancock said. "There are many steps still to take. The full safety data is not yet available and our strong and independent regulator, the MHRA, will not approve a vaccine until it is clinically safe. And until it's rolled out we won't know how long the effect lasts for or its impact, not just on keeping people safe, but also on reducing transmission."
If the vaccine, or any other, is approved, Hancock pledged that the country would be ready to begin a large-scale vaccination programme. "We do not yet know whether or when a vaccine is approved but I have tasked the NHS with being ready from any date from 1 December. The logistics are complex, the uncertainties are real and the scale of the job is vast but I know that the NHS, brilliantly assisted by the armed services, will be up to the task," he explained.
"Deployment of the vaccine will involve working long days, and weekends, and it comes on top of all the NHS has already done for us this year," Hancock said, adding: "I know that they will rise to this challenge, of being ready when the science comes good, to inject hope into millions of arms this winter."
The NHS England letter states: "Given the uncertainty over whether, and when, a vaccine may be approved, we are planning to be ready from any date from December with mass vaccination more likely in the New Year."
It adds: "Designated sites will need to be able to deliver a vaccination service seven days per week including bank holidays between 8am and 8pm if vaccine supply allows. Vaccinations will be centrally supplied and guidance will be issued shortly on the ordering process.
"Practices will need to deliver a minimum of 975 vaccinations over a seven-day period from each designated site, ensuring all those vaccinations are administered within the appropriate shelf life."
The letter explains that practices will be given £12.58 for each vaccine dose, meaning they will receive £25.16 for each patient vaccinated in a two-dose course. Under the programme, patients will be required to undergo a 15-minute observation after the vaccine is administered. Annual flu jabs must be given at least a week apart from Covid vaccines, the documents say, and appointments can be booked through a national system.
"Once patients are notified by the national call/recall service they are eligible for a vaccination, they would have the choice to book an appointment at a general practice-led vaccination centre or, use the national booking service to be vaccinated by another provider," the letter says.