Wales ends 17-day 'firebreak' and brings in looser Covid measures
First minister speaks of early tentative signs the measure has brought down infection rate
There are tentative signs that the 17-day "firebreak" lockdown in Wales has brought down Covid-19 rates, the Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, has said.
Drakeford said the infection rate for the whole of Wales was down from 250 per 100,000 people to just under 220. The rate for one of the worst-hit spots, Merthyr Tydfil in south Wales, had been as high as 700 per 100,000 and was now at 520.
While emphasising that there will be no definitive picture of the impact of the firebreak for a few weeks, Drakeford said: "There are some tentative, early positive signs. Those give us hope."
He also pointed out that the "grim milestone" of 2,000 deaths in Wales had been passed and that there were 1,400 Covid-related cases in Welsh hospitals, more than in April.
A new set of looser national measures has come into force, which will be reviewed in a fortnight, but the first minister said the government had not ruled out imposing more local restrictions if needed.
Drakeford said he was not surprised by images of busy shopping streets on Monday as the firebreak ended, but that he believed stores and the public were being responsible.
"The reports that I've had are that it's being well managed, that these are retail outlets that have made a big effort to make sure that queues are managed, that people coming in and out of shops are properly controlled and that people themselves are doing all the things they can do in observing social distancing and being respectful of other people," Drakeford said.
"I think the fact that people want to do some things today that they've not been able to do for over two weeks wouldn't be that surprising to anyone."
He also said a "common approach to Christmas" would be discussed by the devolved nations and the UK government at a meeting this week.
"I very firmly believe that this is one of those areas where having an approach that is adopted across the United Kingdom is the right way to be able to offer hope to people here in Wales and elsewhere, that we are able to plan purposefully together for the season."
Drakeford said an announcement about next year's exams and other qualifications would be made on Tuesday.
Under the new national measures, groups of up to four people can meet in cafes, pubs and restaurants, and shops, gyms, hairdressers and places of worship have re-opened.
Supermarkets can again sell non-essential items, but people will only be allowed to meet inside homes with members of one other household if they have formed a "bubble".
A 10pm curfew on alcohol sales will carry over from before the firebreak, and people will be required to prove their home address in bars following concerns people in England could flout the country's lockdown and travel to Wales for a drink.
There are no restrictions on travel within Wales, but people will not be allowed to travel outside the country except for a reasonable purpose such as work.
Other new national measures include:
The need to maintain 2-metre social distancing and wear face masks in enclosed public places, including on public transport and taxis.
The requirement to work from home whenever possible will remain.
People should only meet members of their bubble in their own home and only two households will be able to form a bubble. If one person from either household develops symptoms, everyone should immediately self-isolate.
People will be able to meet in groups of up to four people from separate households – not including children aged under 11 – in regulated indoor places, such as hospitality venues including bars, pubs, cafes and restaurants.
Up to 15 people can take part in an organised indoor activity and up to 30 in an organised activity outdoors, providing all social distancing, hand hygiene and other Covid-19 safety measures are followed.
People should avoid non-essential travel as much as possible.
Primary schools and years 7 and 8 in secondary schools remained open during the lockdown apart from the half-term break, but all schools and year groups will resume from Monday.
Universities will resume a combination of in-person teaching and blended learning.