Test and trace records highest weekly total of Covid cases in England
NHS system has also had one of its worst weeks for tracing close contacts of those infected
A total of 137,180 people in England tested positive for Covid-19 in the week ending 28 October, the highest weekly number of cases since NHS test and trace launched in May.
It represents an 8% rise in new positive infections on the previous week, according to Public Health England data. The test-and-trace system also reported having one of its worst weeks in terms of its performance in tracing the close contacts of those infected with Covid-19.
The figures, published by the Department of Health and Social Care, reveal that only 59.9% of close contacts of people who tested positive for coronavirus were reached and asked to self-isolate.
Prof James Naismith, the director of the Rosalind Franklin Institute, said: "The real issue is that less than half of infected people are even being tested – that's the best way to understand why the system has been entirely ineffective. In the week ending 21 October we would estimate from the ONS [Office for National Statistics] there were around 330,000 new cases over that week.:
"So using the government's own assumptions of three contacts per person, that's a million people that need to be contacted through test and trace.
He continued: "Setting up an effective track and trace is an extremely difficult task, and with the current level of infection, it's probably impossible. I wish to stress the UK is not alone in this struggle, the virus is spreading rapidly across the EU and the USA and [these countries] have also failed to implement effective tracing."
Only 41% of coronavirus testing capacity was used in the week ending 28 October, with about 1.5 million people being tested at least once, despite capacity for 3.6m tests.
Nearly two-thirds of in-person test results were received the day after the test was taken, and 52% of home test results were received within 48 hours.
There has been criticism surrounding contracts awarded to companies such as Serco and Sitel, which have previously been reported to have only reached as little as 46% of close contacts in some areas of the UK.
Listed by local authority for Great Britain. The devolved health authority publishes regional statistics for Northern Ireland.
Local health protection teams (HPTs) have been proving highly effective in tracing close contacts of infected people, with 97.9% being reached and asked to self-isolate in the week to 28 October. By contrast, only 58.5% of close contacts not managed by local HPTs were reached.
Experts have said at least 80% of close contacts have to be reached in order for test and trace to be effective. Overall, 33% of close contacts have not been reached since the system began operating in May.