GPs in England told to be ready to administer Covid vaccine by Christmas
Surge in Covid hospital patients predicted to be higher by end of November than April peak
The NHS is preparing to administer any potential coronavirus vaccine before Christmas, as it was revealed that the number of Covid in-patients in England was equivalent to 22 hospitals full of patients.
Simon Stevens, the chief executive of NHS England, said there had been a "very substantial" increase in coronavirus hospital admissions in October.
Projections by the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (SPI-M) show that, by the end of November, there will be more Covid in-patients than there were during the first peak in April.
But there was some hope as Stevens disclosed the health service was preparing to write to all GPs across the country in anticipation of a potential vaccine being available before Christmas.
GPs will be "geared up to start by Christmas if the vaccine becomes available", Stevens said.
He added: "There are over 200 vaccines in development and we believe that we should hopefully get one or more of those available from the first part of next year.
"In anticipation of that we're also gearing the NHS up to be ready to make a start on administering Covid vaccines before Christmas, if they become available.
"We reached an agreement with GPs to ensure they will be doing that, and we'll be writing to GP practices this week to get them geared up to start by Christmas if the vaccine becomes available."
Stevens said the health service was "adding as much capacity as it can" in anticipation of the usual winter pressures and greater demand due to the pandemic.
"In many parts of the country we're now seeing more coronavirus in-patients in hospital and in intensive care than we saw in the first peak in April," he said.
In early September, there were under 500 coronavirus patients in hospitals, he said. By the beginning of October that figure had risen to 2,000. The current figure is just under 11,000 in-patients.
"So, put another way, we've got 22 hospitals' worth of coronavirus patients across England. And indeed, even since Saturday, when the prime minister gave his press conference, we filled another two hospitals full of severely ill coronavirus patients," he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.
Stevens urged the public to adhere to national lockdown restrictions to preserve other services as he revealed that a quarter of routine operations had been cancelled in the north-west.
"And the reason we want to try and minimise the number of coronavirus infections and patients is not only because of the excess death rate that implies, but because of the knock-on consequences it has for other services: routine operations, cancer care," he said.
He added: "So if we want to preserve those other services so that the health service can continue to help the full range of patients, we need to do everything we can, together, to keep the infection rate down for coronavirus."
A further 397 people were reported on Tuesday as having died in the UK within 28 days of testing positive for coronavirus, the highest daily increase in Covid-related deaths in five months.
While the Tuesday tally tends to be higher owing to a delay in reporting deaths over the weekend, the latest figure is nevertheless the highest recorded since 422 people were reported as having died on 27 May.
It is more than seven times the daily toll recorded on 23 March when the first national lockdown began, and takes the government's official coronavirus death toll for the UK since the pandemic began to 47,250.
However, separate figures published by the UK's statistics agencies for deaths, where Covid-19 has been mentioned on the death certificate, together with additional data on deaths that have occurred in recent days, show there have now been just under 63,000 deaths involving Covid-19 in the UK.
Stevens also suggested that all patient-facing NHS staff would soon be routinely tested, regardless of symptoms.
He said: "Routine testing of asymptomatic NHS staff has now begun in high prevalence parts of the country, areas where there are outbreaks, and more than 70,000 NHS staff have had those tests within the last several weeks.
"And the chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, yesterday wrote to the health committee, to parliament, explaining that, because the availability of testing had now increased, and we've got this new saliva testing that will be available for hospital and other health service staff over the next six or eight weeks, we will now be able to press on routinely testing all patient-facing NHS staff."