Faith leaders challenge England lockdown ban on communal worship
Letter to PM signed by senior religious figures says there is no scientific basis for ban in new coronavirus restrictions
England's most senior faith leaders have challenged the government's decision to ban communal worship during the second lockdown, telling Boris Johnson there is no scientific basis for the move.
In a marked change of tone from the lockdown earlier this year, the faith leaders say: "We strongly disagree with the decision to suspend public worship during this time."
Continuation of public worship is essential, the leaders of the Church of England, Catholic church and orthodox Judaism, along with Muslim, Hindu, Sikh and Pentecostal representatives, told the prime minister in a joint letter.
Places of worship have demonstrated in recent months that they can be made safe from Covid transmission, they say. "Given the significant work we have already done, we consider there to be, now, no scientific justification for the wholesale suspension of public worship."
Highlighting the work done by churches, synagogues, mosques and temples to support communities through the pandemic, they add: "Our commitment to care for others comes directly from our faith, which must be sustained and strengthened by our meeting together in common worship."
Earlier, Christopher Chessun, the Anglican bishop of Southwark, urged clergy and members of congregations in his diocese to write to MPs "questioning these restrictions".
He said: "The church is not a branch of the leisure or hospitality industries with a tap that can be turned on and off by politicians at will. The right to freedom of religion is enshrined in Magna Carta and it is of the very essence of our common life that the liberties and freedoms of the people of this land extend to public worship."
A legal challenge over the ban on communal worship is expected to be launched by a conservative faith-based organisation, with the backing of more than 70 leaders from different Christian traditions.
A pre-action letter organised by Christian Concern, which has been behind a string of legal cases citing freedom of religion in recent years, says: "Our clients fully acknowledge the seriousness of the coronavirus pandemic and the need for drastic precautions … However, such precautions may only be lawfully introduced by the churches themselves … Our clients are gravely concerned about this infringement of the constitutional liberties of the church by the secular government."
The Muslim Council of Britain has called for an urgent review of restrictions, criticising the government's "inadequate consultation and poor engagement with faith communities".
Sikhs have raised concerns about Bandi Chhor Divas and Guru Nanak Dev Ji's Gurpurab, two holidays in November when most Sikhs attend their Gurdwara. "It appears the government ignored the needs of the Sikh community," said Bhai Amrik Singh, the chair of the Sikh Federation (UK).
The interfaith letter to the prime minister was signed by Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury; Stephen Cottrell, the archbishop of York; Sarah Mullally, the bishop of London; Vincent Nichols, the archbishop of Westminster; Ephraim Mirvis, the chief rabbi; Gurmail Singh Malhi, president Sri Guru Singh Sabha, Southall; Shaykh Dr Asim Yusuf, chair of the British Board of Scholars and Imams; Sayed Yousif Al-Khoei of Al-Khoei Foundation; Agu Irukwu, senior pastor, Jesus House for all Nations; Rajnish Kashyap, general secretary of the Hindu Council UK; and Daniel Singleton, national executive director of Faith Action.