Handful of businesses threaten to defy lockdown in England
Owners face £10,000 fine after publicly vowing to flout closure due to begin on Thursday
Businesses including a beauty salon near Liverpool are vowing to remain open and defy England's lockdown when it comes into force on Thursday.
Companies face a £10,000 fine if they refuse to comply with restrictions ordering the closure of pubs, restaurants, hairdressers, gyms and all non-essential retailers.
Regulations setting out the new laws in England are due to be published on Tuesday before being put to a vote by MPs on Wednesday. If passed, as expected, the measures would come into effect at 12.01am on Thursday. While the vast majority of businesses are expected to comply with the rules, a small number have publicly vowed to flout them.
The beauty salon in Bootle, Merseyside, whose owners have denied the existence of coronavirus, said it would open as usual on Thursday and fight any fine through the courts. A message on the Instagram page of Skin Kerr said: "We will not be locking down again. We will remain open. We will fight this and any fines in a common law court."
The owner of the salon previously described the pandemic as a "bullshit voodoo virus" and displayed posters saying: "You can't catch what doesn't exist," as well as banning masks and "Covid talk".
The salon did not respond to a request to comment. It posted a clip on Instagram on Sunday of the conspiracy theorist David Icke calling Covid-19 "a scam" and urging businesses to "simply refuse to lock down".
A martial arts gym in Wigan has also vowed to stay open. In a Facebook post, the Majestic Gym claimed it was "cleaner and safer than any supermarket, fast food outlet or anywhere else that is allowed to stay open" and called on other businesses to "refuse to obey the tyranny".
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
Kevin Harper, the gym's owner, said his facility was "cleaner than an operating theatre" and that gyms were "as important as churches, hospitals, pubs and restaurants" so should be allowed to stay open.
He said he would fight any fine and "clog the legal system". "I've not broken any laws. I have not injured anybody. I have not hurt anybody. That will be my legal argument. And on Thursday morning when I open up at 9.30 the police will be here, I guarantee, and I welcome them. These are not criminal matters. It's preposterous."
Harper, who has run the gym for 12 years, falsely claimed that there was "no categorical scientific proof that coronavirus even exists" but that he had a rigorous safety process in place, including temperature checks on arrival, strict social distancing and a "50-page risk assessment".
He added: "When we did that first lockdown, I nearly went bankrupt. I can't afford to do that again. I'm not being selfish, I'm being realistic. I'll switch salaries with the prime minister, if he wants to take my £750 a month that I'm currently getting. I'm not going to be able to survive. I've got children. My wife's pregnant. I've no choice but to stay open."
Police chiefs are bracing themselves for potentially worse compliance among a weary public than during the first lockdown. Officers across the UK were called out to rule-breaking raves and house parties over the Halloween weekend.