Call for $750m rescue package for coronavirus-hit Australian arts
Survey finds 58% of respondents support government help for the industry and just 24% oppose it
The Australia Institute is calling for a $750m rescue package for the arts industry after the closure of pubs, clubs, theatres and recital halls left almost 200,000 creative arts workers out of a job.
The arts industry is worth $15bn annually to the national economy but most of its 193,600 workers have been excluded from the federal government's $130bn jobkeeper wage replacement program, despite defining themselves as "sole traders" like a tradesperson.
And their plight is certain to continue for several months, longer than for many employment sectors because service industries will be among the last to re-open.
Sign up for Guardian Australia's daily coronavirus email newsletter
The progressive Australia Institute thinktank believes the federal government should deliver a $750m rescue package for those in the creative arts, and reports an opinion poll found strong voter support for the idea.
The institute calculates the closure of performance venues including art galleries has cost national gross domestic product the equivalent of $14.7bn a year.
"Creative and performing arts employ four times as many people as coalmining and as many as in finance, yet the economic contribution of this sector is rarely discussed," research director at the Australia Institute, Rod Campbell, said in a statement on Wednesday.
Campbell said an institute opinion survey had found 58% of respondents supported government help for the industry, and just 24% opposed it.
"The Covid-19 crisis has hit the arts hard, with reports of over $330m in contracts lost," he said.
An organisation to track the numbers of lost jobs in the industry has been set up by the Australian Festival Association and the Australian Music Industry Network.
Called I Lost My Gig, it has calculated that as of 7 April some $330m in paid performances had been dumped.
On Wednesday Labor accused the federal government of adding to the "pain and uncertainty" of the performing arts by suspending local content quotas for new Australian dramas, documentaries and children's programs for domestic broadcasters.
The opposition's arts spokesman, Tony Burke, called it a "blow for a screen sector that's already hurting".
"Screen production has been hit hard by the coronavirus crisis, with many thousands of people losing work," Burke said in a statement on Wednesday.
Screen Producers Australia also criticised the government's hard suspension of local content quotas.
"These hard cuts have the potential to at worst cripple Australia's production industry and at best snuff the opportunities for a rebound for much of our sector at a time when it is facing a very real battle for survival," said Matthew Deaner, the CEO of Screen Producers Australia.