Leotards in lockdown: ballet dancers find new ways to keep fit – but how long can they hold on?
They're taking classes in their kitchens and leaping through parks. But with theatres closed for months, is artistry at risk?
Every morning at 11am, the 81 dancers of the Australian Ballet log into Microsoft Teams to join their morning quarantine class. They can't see each other but they can see their ballet teacher in the studio.
Some have a two-metre square piece of ballet flooring to work on – a gift from the company. Parquet and floorboards are too slippery, and carpet is not slippery enough. A few have trekked to Bunnings to buy sheets of Masonite to lay under their ballet flooring for a bit of extra spring.
"It is quite bizarre but we wanted to keep the dancers on some kind of schedule," says David McAllister, whose artistic directorship of the Australian Ballet is ending this year. He didn't expect to spend the final months of the job working from home: "I think I will be having a digital farewell."
This week is the company's fourth in lockdown.
The dancers are maintaining their fitness with daily class and online strength training sessions with the company's health team. Spirits seem high but the dancers are keenly aware that this is exercise, not dance.
Without the opportunity to move as a group, lift their partners, or fly across a stage with turns and leaps, can these athletes maintain their artistry and performance level if theatres are closed for an extended period?
It is possible theatres will remain dark until a coronavirus vaccine becomes widely available. That could be a year. Or even longer. Either way, it would be a disaster for ballet.
The company is preparing for every possibility, McAllister says.
"Our aim at the moment is just to keep a level of fitness so when we are allowed back in the studio we can start rehearsing the repertoire again." He estimates it would take the company at least five weeks to return to performance level.
"Working on a two-metre square piece of floor is not a lot of room so a lot of the dancers are a going into parks – practising social distancing – to do some grand jetés, the big ballet leaps, to get that sense of moving through space," McAllister says. "A dancer needs to feel that they are moving."
Theatres closed for a year or more is the company's current worst-case scenario; on Tuesday night the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra announced it would "hibernate" 85 full-time musicians and 12 administrative staff. Those eligible will receive the federal government's jobkeeper wage subsidy.
It's a reminder of the precariousness of the industry and the financial pressures every Australian performing arts organisation faces. The Australian Ballet company's dancers and staff are being paid, though it's unclear how long this arrangement can be maintained.
The company is in a solid financial position, compared with many smaller arts organisations, with a diverse revenue stream that includes ticket sales, income from its properties and car park, merchandise, ballet classes and significant donations and bequests. Some donations are held for specific purposes and can't be drawn on, though, and it still faces the same devastating box office losses in 2020 as other arts companies.
"Apart from the amount of performing we are missing out on, we need to keep the company solvent," McAllister says. "The board has been very clear about wanting to look after the people first but ultimately we need to make sure there is a company to come back to. We have a lot of things to balance.
"But at this stage, we are guided by what the government is telling us to do. We are rolling with the punches and staying positive. We are taking this one month at a time."
To stay in touch with audiences, the Australian Ballet has launched a free, watch-from-home digital season with a new full-length ballet online every two weeks. The Sleeping Beauty is streaming until 17 April, followed by Cinderella and Romeo &amp; Juliet. The company is also offering free adult online ballet classes for all levels.
On Instagram you can watch the dancers practising in their kitchens, using the bench or a high stool as a barre. The principal dancer Kevin Jackson posted a video of his groodle, Sasha, walking in between his legs as he tries to exercise ("no sound, I used profanity").
Serena Graham posted a video of her being bench-pressed by her  partner, Joseph Romancewicz.
The dancers support each other in isolation with daily coffee catchups over Skype. Staff call every dancer each day to monitor their physical and mental wellbeing.
Amanda McGuigan, 32, a coryphée in the company, has returned to Sydney to support her mother and grandparents. They all live in the same house in the inner west.
"I'm using the mantlepiece in the lounge room as a barre, so I'm just dancing around the fireplace," McGuigan said. "I wanted to come home so I can be a help to people who might be most affected by the virus. I wanted to do my part to support them and just be around to help out."
McGuigan maintains her fitness with a morning yoga class on Instagram live video, followed by a video chat with six of her fellow dancers, and a two-hour company class on Teams. In the afternoons she runs in the local park.
"In class, we are still doing pirouettes and small jumps, so that keeps our legs going, but we have put the big jetés in the cupboard for now," McGuigan said. "But I'm feeling good. The honest truth is I'm trying to stay positive for the people around me as I know how, as an individual, you can affect other people."
McGuigan's dog frequently gets involved in her class. So does her grandmother. "She comes into the room and does the final 20 minutes of class with me. It's a beautiful moment for me each day – she makes me realise who I am doing this for."
She doesn't think about how long this lockdown will last, or how long it will be before she gets back on stage. "I'm not worried at all about getting my performance level back. The dancing is in all of us, it is innate …
"But I do miss my friends. I miss seeing everyone's smiles and working with people who push you and inspire you. We all want to get back on stage and see the audiences. And hugging. I just want to sit next to someone and put my arm around them and just get back to normal life."