Australians are as happy as before coronavirus lockdown, Guardian Essential poll finds
Voters report the same levels of happiness as when the pubs were open, although with more financial worries
Australia is battling through the drudgery and fears of the coronavirus attack and counterattack but its people are also sharing a remarkable condition of strength.
They are happy. In fact just as happy as in May last year when there was no virus, mass dole queues or police-enforced lockdowns and the pubs were open.
That's a finding of an Essential Research survey released Tuesday which gives an insight into how Australians are putting up with this unprecedented crisis.
Of course there are big worries: 85% of voters are concerned about the economy.
And 12% reported to Essential Research that they were struggling with self-isolation and feared for their mental health.
However, there also is a happy streak, discovered when voters were asked to rate their overall happiness out of 10.
The average was 6.7 out of 10, the same as figures recorded in May 2019. And it was roughly the same for all age groups.
Happiness with personal and family matters rates seven; and 6.4 for spiritual life.
The least happiness is with financial situations, on 5.6.
It seems Australians are adjusting to the restrictions, with 57% of voters telling Essential they spend more time connecting with people through text messages, phone calls and online chats. A further 21% are taking up online activities such as fitness classes and school subjects.
Just over half of respondents say they have no concerns about reduced contact with friends and family, or that they are coping with seeing them less.
But 37% are missing those connections and sadly 12% are feeling isolated or are struggling to maintain a daily routine.
One factor which might aid endurance of emergency measures is that 59% of voters believe the response to Covid-19 is about right, up from 46% last week.
Just 13% think it is an overreaction.
The federal government is credited with doing a quite good or very good job by 63% of voters, up from 58% last week.
All mainland state governments are saluted by a majority of their voters, with an interesting demarcation between the major states of New South Wales and Victoria, the principal voices in the national cabinet apart from the federal government.
The Victorian Labor government is rated as providing a good response by 75% of voters. The NSW Coalition government rating was just 56%.
That wasn't the lowest of the states – that went to Queensland with just 52% approval.
The Western Australian government's response was the most popular on 79%, while South Australia rated 71%.