The coronavirus response has created a more accessible society – but how long will it last?
In a world that has been turned upside-down, there have been some expected benefits, and many hope they will remain
Every few months Jennie Hill has an argument with Centrelink about why her eldest son, who has severe obsessive compulsive disorder, has to attend a face-to-face meeting in order for his payments to continue.
"I argued several times, 'can we just do this over the phone?' because it's very distressing for him," Hill says. "He had to be hospitalised once after a meeting … but they always said no, it has to be in person.
"Then this Covid-19 hits and I am just sitting back watching everything they are doing to give over-the-phone access. I just thought: oh, OK. Apparently it's all just so easy."
Doctor's appointments can also now be conducted remotely, despite previous protestations. Medicare coverage for telehealth services was expanded last month, and for the next six months that includes mental health appointments.
The coronavirus crisis has achieved what years of advocacy has not: made essential services more accessible and boosted welfare payments into something approaching the living wage. It was easily – or at least quickly – done.
For those who argued for these changes on accessibility grounds, the rapid changes have been bittersweet. The government has not suddenly heard their pleas. The benefit to those with disability or chronic illness was incidental.
"The main reason it's so painful is it wasn't important for anyone to change it until it mattered to non-disabled people, or healthy people," Hill says. "All of these things that sick people or disabled people have been asking for for years didn't matter to anyone until it mattered to healthy people."
Scott Morrison has repeatedly said that the measures put in place during the coronavirus crisis will be temporary; that the economy will "snap back", as will previous ways of doing business.
Economists have cast serious doubt on the former and begun to cast doubt on the latter. If a change is beneficial, why would it be wound back?
Much depends on how quickly the changes introduced to manage the coronavirus are rescinded. Experts have suggested a slow withdrawal may be necessary to prevent a sudden resurgence in infections.
Economist Saul Eslake says the government, having shown what it can provide in terms of a generous social safety net, will find itself in a tug-of-war with voters.
"People are going to have much bigger expectations of what government can and should do for them," Eslake says.
He says some changes, introduced as part of the social distancing measures, are likely to become entrenched.
Take the cash economy. It had been waning before the virus, with the widespread use of contactless payments. In the past month many businesses have stopped accepting cash out of concern the virus could spread through notes and coins, and Coles and Woolworths have increased the permitted contactless payment to $200. That trend is unlikely to be reversed, Eslake says.
And if a business wishes its employees to be eligible for the $1,500 a fortnight jobkeeper payment, it needs to have paid staff lawfully, rather than taking cash from the till.
"It will cause an unexpected incentive for people to get their affairs in order at the tax office," Eslake says.
The author Anna Spargo-Ryan has watched both mental health services and events in the arts community become more accessible with a growing sense of frustration.
She routinely turns down invitations to speak at writers' festivals because she cannot appear in person and has been told that it's "too hard" for writers to appear via videolink.
"It [the lack of access] is not malicious; it's just not a priority," Spargo-Ryan says.
Even events that might be expected to do better are often not set up for people with different access requirements.
"I have received emails like: 'we have a conference about agoraphobia in Sydney and we would really like you to come and speak about it'," Spargo-Ryan says.
It has been both exciting and annoying for her to see events such as the Newcastle Writers Festival and Emerging Writers' Festival convert to an online-only format in response to the coronavirus.
"It is annoying on the one hand to feel like … the reason that I felt it was important was not good enough," she says. "That my need and the needs of people who have similar requirements to me, that wasn't a good enough reason to provide it and that after all that it wasn't as hard as people had implied."
In many professions, the coronavirus has led to a relaxation of red tape so that business can continue. The federal and family courts are conducting hearings via telephone, and magistrates courts have moved a range of procedural matters to email or telephone conference. Non-urgent contested hearings have been adjourned, leading to a spike in cases being resolved by mediation. This is particularly true in the family court, says the Law Council of Australia president Pauline Wright.
"What I am hearing across the profession is that many people are trying really hard now to settle matters without the need for waiting for a hearing," Wright says. "It means that the people affected by family law disputes are actually coming together to agree more often than would ordinarily be the case. So this pandemic has done some good in bringing people together in that sense."
Wright says lawyers may argue for some changes – such as an increased accommodation for telephone or video hearings – to remain in place after the crisis is over, because they save lawyers' time and therefore their clients' money.
"If I go from my office to the local court it will take me 40 minutes to get there but while I am there I might be waiting for another 40 minutes or an hour before my client's matter gets heard, and it might be a five-minute matter," she says.
But Wright says other changes, like a decision in Victoria to give priority to judge-only trials, should not continue after restrictions are lifted.
"We don't want to see changes brought into place just for the sake of efficiency, because efficiency does not mean fairness or justice," she says.
The Pharmacy Guild has also argued that the six-month extension of the continued dispensing of emergency medicines scheme should continue after the crisis. The scheme allows pharmacists to provide known customers with one refill of their medication per year without a script and still have access to the pharmaceutical benefits scheme.
The changes most likely to stick, says Eslake, are those that had already begun before the coronavirus hit.
Workplaces already offering flexible working conditions to staff may take that model further after six months and continue to allow all their staff to work from home. Other companies that previously resisted may learn that they have not lost productivity by letting employees work from their kitchen tables.
That could result in a lasting change in the way Australians work, says Eslake, especially as companies realise it's cheaper not to have to pay commercial rent.
However Alex Prineas, an equity analyst from Morningstar Australasia, says some people may emerge from the pandemic with a loathing for working from home, and companies will have to adjust accordingly.
"Human nature is not going to have changed, we are still going to need to socialise, to meet in person to communicate better than we do over the phone," Prineas says.
Whatever the office looks like, it will be cheaper. The cost of renting an office building has increased 60% in the past five years. That's likely to take a dive, Prineas says.
The combined impact of having to work from home, care for children at home, and conduct home-schooling for older children could discourage women from having children, says Australian National University demographer Liz Allen.
"Australia will likely see postponement and even foregone births, meaning we may see fewer and fewer children being born … leading to major pressure on the economic wellbeing of the nation – population growth is crucial to a strong economy," Allen says.
The decline may only be marginal, but Australia's birth rate is already below replacement level. Immigration will become even more important, and could cause conflict if not managed against a growing view among nationalists that isolationism was the right approach all along.
Allen says the socioeconomic impact of the virus will be much harder on and felt for much longer by women, whose average superannuation balance on retirement is already lower.
The chairman of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, Rob Sims, cites e-health and e-education services as one area where Australia may be permanently changed.
But mostly, he says, Australia will go back to normal.
"I'm certainly going to want a haircut when this is over," Sims says. "I'm going to go to my office and get a cup of coffee from the coffee shop at the bottom of my floor, I'm going to catch up with friends and go out to a restaurant four or five times in the first week.
"There'll be interesting changes out of this but I largely see things going back to normal."
Additional reporting by Ben Butler