NRL insists it has green light to restart as NSW government again calls move into question
Rugby league chairman Peter V'landys says he already has the required documentation but is happy to consult NSW Health
The NRL insists it has been given the green light to restart play in May but its chairman, Peter V'landys, has said the league is happy to consult NSW Health further if required.
The game's planned 28 May restart was again called into question by the New South Wales premier, Gladys Berejiklian, on Saturday when she said she had not approved a return.
Berejiklian said the NRL was not on a list of forced closures or bans, but the league had to ensure it could return safely.
The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, also said the issue was a matter for NSW Health and not politicians.
Speaking again on Saturday about the game's resumption, the minister said the NRL had to have a discussion with NSW Health to see if it could return next month safely.
But the NRL is confident it already has the documentation required to do so.
A 31 March public health order prevents people staying on premises, but excludes events such as sport or racing. V'landys told AAP he had emailed the State Emergency Operations Centre after that order was issued and, last week, received a positive response.
"We've got a letter from the coordinator confirming that we can train and play," V'landys said.
"So I could dot the 'i's and cross the 't's; I got a separate letter off the department, which is the State Emergency Operations Centre, that is implementing the health order.
"And it says it does not preclude the NRL from commencing the competition. It says in the absence of crowds at relevant stadiums."
The document, obtained by AAP and signed off by NSW police commissioner Mick Fuller, was in response to a question of whether game could restart without crowds.
It says players can travel to and from games and training for work. It also states other directions must be complied with, including not having more than 500 people in stadiums and the venues being big enough to ensure safety for all workers.
Any player who contracts the virus must also be quarantined until they are cleared medically.
The letter pertains only to NSW-based teams as they fall within the government's jurisdiction, but the NRL said it was working to ensure other clubs were able to travel to the state for games.
"In summary, subject to the compliance with the matters dealt with above, the NSW Health Minister's Directions would not preclude the commencement of the modified NRL competition," it said.
When asked if the league was willing to sit down with NSW Health over the measures of the NRL's return, V'landys said he was.
"If he [Hazzard] says we have to, we will, but I have letters saying we can [return]," V'landys said.
"We'll do anything the state government requires us to do, but we are still of the firm view that we have permission in writing and it's in the health order.
"I totally understand how busy they are, so accordingly I don't expect them to know all the detail.
"But we're comfortable we have the permission both in writing and in the health order."
The NRL also cited the continued drop of new cases in NSW, which are down significantly from when the game was stopped on 23 March.
Players would be asked to undertake a number of biosecurity measures when the game returns, including around hygiene, self-isolation and temperature checks.
The federal deputy chief medical officer, Nick Coatsworth, was asked about the NRL's proposed return and said there should be a single rule for all sporting codes.
"We have to have an approach which covers all codes and I think at this point in time it is that we don't have training and we don't have matches and we keep social distancing, which is the object of not having sporting events," he told reporters on Saturday.
"We do understand though that sport is a major part of the Australian psyche."
Hazzard had said he, too, hoped sport could return, but only once given the tick by authorities.
"It's a 'have a discussion with health authorities to see if it can be done safely' [situation]," Hazzard said.
"If it is possible for a sport, any sport, to operate in a safe way, that's a question for health authorities – not politicians.
"The government did not stop rugby league from playing – rugby league stopped rugby league from playing [last month when the competition was suspended].
"We haven't actually taken any steps one way or the other."