National cabinet agrees to hardship payments to help cover utility bills
Households and small businesses struggling because of the coronavirus pandemic to be given help to pay bills
States have agreed to uniform hardship payments for households and small businesses struggling with water rates and energy bills during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Premiers in the national cabinet of federal and state leaders on Thursday agreed to adopt the commonwealth's model of support and to consult the big utility providers involved.
The businesses eligible for the help will be those with access to the jobkeeper payments as they are considered to be under financial stress.
The extended assistance program came amid suggestions that tough restrictions on physical distancing and business operations might be eased earlier than the six months the federal government has indicated would be their minimum lifespan.
But the "early steps" would only happen if "they are safe", health minister Greg Hunt told reporters in Canberra on Thursday.
Hunt said there had been no change to the general forecast that the limits on movements and commercial trading could operate for at least six months.
He said "where we can take early steps that are safe, then we will obviously look to do that".
Hunt indicated the possibility was being considered by the national cabinet but said it was a "very careful analysis".
"So I'd rather not speculate on the work of the national chagrined," he said.
The national cabinet met in a teleconference amid calls for the restrictions imposed since mid-March to be relaxed before the six months was up.
The leadership group as been consulting up to twice a week for a month but for the first time prime minister Scott Morrison declined to hold a post-meeting press conference, issuing a statement instead.
This reflected a view within the government that the major measures had been deployed following passage of legislation for the $130bn jobkeeper scheme on Wednesday.
Meetings were now expected to be progress reports and smaller policy decisions, with the talks next week expected to deal with health matters.
Morrison left no room for relenting on restrictions in his statement.
"It's clear that social distancing measures are working, we're slowing the spread of the virus," he said in the statement.
"But there is a long way to go, we will be living with this virus for at least six months.
"National cabinet reminds Australians to stay home for the Easter break – stay home and save lives."
The prime minister said, "National Cabinet stressed the critical importance of continuing to adhere to self-isolation, social distancing and quarantine arrangements for returned travellers. "Leaders also highlighted the importance of people who are self-isolating and registering on the COVID-19 app.
"National cabinet noted that Australia was now in the suppression phase of the response, which will last for some time. Restrictions will be reviewed regularly and planning for the medium to long-term has begun."