Australian companies to build 2,000 ventilators to boost coronavirus capacity
The new ventilators will be exempt from the usual safety and performance laws in a bid to get them into hospitals urgently
Two thousand new ventilators will be built in Australia by the end of July, a significant boost to the capacity of hospitals to respond to Covid-19.
The federal government has also enacted new powers allowing the health minister to exempt ventilators from the usual safety and performance laws of the Therapeutic Goods Administration in a bid to urgently get equipment into hospitals.
Federal and state authorities have been working frantically to increase stocks of ventilators during the coronavirus crisis.
The federal government wants to triple intensive care unit capacity but modelling suggests there are currently not enough invasive ventilators – used to aid breathing in seriously ill Covid-19 patients – to support such a surge.
On Thursday the federal industry minister, Karen Andrews, and Victorian jobs minister, Martin Pakula, announced that 2,000 new invasive ventilators would be produced by a consortium of local companies, led by Grey Innovation, a Victorian business.
The Advanced Manufacturing Growth Centre, an industry-led not-for-profit, helped broker the deal, which, within a matter of weeks, has transformed Grey Innovation and its consortium into one of only two Australian manufacturers of ventilators.
Its managing director, Jens Goennemann, said the project had been turned around with remarkable speed.
"Have you seen something like that in manufacturing? It's awesome," he told the Guardian.
Goennemann said it showed the value of having an advanced and versatile manufacturing sector in Australia.
"You can't respond if you are just an assembler," he said. "You need to respond by being a manufacturer. The whole value chain: R&amp;D, design, logistics, distribution, and service after. That is the versatility, the resilience, of a good manufacturing sector."
The extra ventilators will represent an almost doubling of Australia's ventilator stocks. Surveys of ICUs combined with hospital data suggest Australia currently has about 2,300 invasive ventilators. Hospitals have an ability to surge to 4,258 intensive care beds (191% increase), but that could only be matched by a surge of 2,631 invasive ventilators (120% increase), leaving a potential shortfall.
The federal government's $31.3m agreement with the Grey Innovation consortium is supported by a $500,000 grant from the Victorian government.
Production will begin in June and be completed by the end of July, using an existing design – owned by a separate medical device manufacturer and certified abroad – to get the ventilators into hospitals sooner.
"This deal demonstrates the power of bringing Aussie manufacturers and clinicians together and is also a reflection of the highly advanced manufacturing capability that exists in our country," Andrews said in a statement.
The announcement comes just a day after new powers were enacted giving ministerial power to exempt ventilators from the usual safety and performance requirements of the Therapeutic Goods Act.
Such exemptions can only be made by the minister "so that the devices can be made available urgently in Australia in order to deal with an actual threat to public health caused by an emergency".
The new powers were registered on Wednesday and will cease on 31 January 2021.
Ventilators are key in responding to Covid-19. Shortages in places such as Italy and the United States have had disastrous impacts and, in some cases, have forced doctors to decide which patients in swamped ICUs will get access to the life-saving equipment.