Stores in remote Indigenous communities ask city dwellers to stop hoarding
Suppliers are struggling to get essentials like toilet paper. 'We have to supply 5,000 people. Thirty cartons are not enough,' says one
Community stores servicing hundreds of Aboriginal communities now in lockdown say they are still having trouble finding essential supplies, and are pleading with city dwellers to stop hoarding.
Mai Wiru, a not-for-profit corporation that supplies 11 community stores in remote South Australia and the Northern Territory, said stockpiling and hoarding in towns and cities had made it hard to source and supply the basics to remote communities.
"We have been trying to buy toilet paper for weeks now," said the CEO of Mai Wiru, Dennis Bate. "I've had buyers out there scouring the countryside to buy bulk toilet paper and not much luck.
"We have to supply 5,000 people. Thirty cartons a week is just not enough."
Mai Wiru operates a weekly road train from Adelaide which takes several days to deliver to all the community stores.
"So if our load is picked on a Monday, we have to make do with what we can get on that day. We get one bite of the cherry.
"If we don't get it then, we are never going to see toilet paper," he said.
Mai Wiru has doubled its road train service, but Bate said he was "worried about how we are going to keep this up".
The demand in communities was greater, he said, because so many people were sent home under biosecurity measures, but those same measures meant shipping supplies into those communities was more difficult.
"People don't understand the ramifications; it's quite complex. There are restrictions on who can go out to the stores. As CEO, I have to get special police permission. That takes out half of our regular freight companies, and those who remain have their own set of priorities.
"It's an uneven playing ground. My long-term worry is the hoarding. That's the issue.
"Woolies and Coles are making a killing out of this, and the silly punters have brought on themselves. But there are ramifications for people down the line. Stop hoarding, let the manufacturers catch up and it'll all go down again.
"Share it out. There's enough to go around."A spokesperson for Woolworths said it appreciated "the current situation is frustrating for our customers in remote communities".
"There has been an unprecedented level of demand for groceries, which has put enormous pressure on Australian supply chains.
"We are working hard behind the scenes with a number of key stakeholders, including the government, to improve the situation for the benefit of these communities."
Coles said it was "lifting restrictions on all known remote groups for Coles online deliveries", was making weekly deliveries to some communities in isolation, including Yarrabah in Queensland, and was working with the Western Australian government to provide a remote order service.
The Central land council said the big supermarket chains also need to lift item restrictions so that remote communities could buy in bulk and spare themselves trips into towns like Alice Springs for supplies.
The minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt met with the big supermarkets, the NT chief minister, Michael Gunner, and community store operators to guarantee supply chains for the expected months-long duration of the Covid-19 lockdown.
Wyatt said there was a lot of goodwill to resolve the situation.
"We will meet again in two weeks time to see how the goodwill is translated into outcomes," he said.
"There is a focus on the top items stores provide to communities, and the challenge also is the changing season, which means that if there's rain, then some of them will have challenges in having access to food supply. So we'll look at options as to how we get food into those communities.
"As the chief minister [Gunner] said, this is about the way in which governments at all levels ensure food continuity to Aboriginal communities in remote areas.
"We've asked them to stay in their communities so we also have to ensure that food safety or access paramount."
Wyatt said he has asked the national Covid-19 coordination commission to work with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) to monitor the cost of goods in remote communities, and ensure that enforcement measures are communicated to store operators.