Modelling shows the strain coronavirus could put on Australia's health system
Scott Morrison warns Covid-19 gains could be undermined if people start to ignore physical distancing rules
Australia's gains in slowing the spread of coronavirus could be undermined if people start to ignore physical distancing rules, the Morrison government warned, as it released modelling of the potential strain on the health system.
After facing weeks of calls to release the evidence it is using to justify sweeping restrictions on social and economic life, the government published material on Tuesday that is based on the impact of strategies that have been rolled out around the world – but not Australian case numbers.
If there were an unchecked outbreak in Australia, the modelling suggests, some 35,000 intensive care beds could be required at its peak – something that would be well beyond the country's capacity to provide.
But the modelling also suggests that with isolation and quarantine measures in place, ICU demand drops to 17,000 at the peak of an outbreak. When these measures are combined with physical distancing, the peak demand may drop below 5,000.
On the eve of the resumption of parliament for a special one-day sitting, the government said the work was "highly theoretical" and experts would require another few weeks to prepare further modelling based on Australian case numbers.
But Scott Morrison said the existing restrictions were helping to "flatten the curve" and "buying time" so that governments across the country could decide the best options for Australia in the months ahead.
The prime minister said part of the country's "modest success to date" meant that the number of cases of community transmission – fewer than 1 in 10 confirmed cases – was still quite low, which did not present a very big case base for more detailed Australian modelling.
"For now, and certainly over the weeks ahead, though, the lesson is simple, and that is that we must continue to do what we are doing – that is how we get through this," Morrison said.
"We have bought valuable time, but we cannot be complacent. We must keep the tension in the cord. This Easter weekend will be incredibly important. Stay at home. Failure to do so this weekend would completely undo everything we have achieved so far together, and potentially worse."
The Doherty Institute – which prepared the modelling work for the Department of Health – briefed journalists via videoconference later on Tuesday.
James McCaw, a professor of mathematical biology and infectious diseases epidemiologist at the University of Melbourne, said the team had started new work "in the last few days" to provide Australian governments with short-term outlooks on transmission, future load on the health system, and potential responses.
He likened it to pivoting from long-term climate outlooks to daily weather forecasts. How that would be released to the public would be up to the government.
The modelling was released after the latest meeting of the national cabinet of state and territory leaders.
The leaders agreed to a mandatory code of conduct to govern the renegotiation of commercial leases, but Morrison said residential tenancies would be dealt with separately by each state and territory, with no baselines beyond the six-month moratorium on evictions.
The code governs leases for tenants with an annual turnover of $50m or less that also meet the threshold for jobkeeper payments, a reduction in turnover of at least 30%.
Commercial landlords and distressed tenants will negotiate rent reductions in proportion to the decline in the tenant's turnover through a combination of deferral and waivers of rent, overseen by binding mediation.
Waivers of rent must account for 50%, at least, of the reduction in the rental provided to the tenant during that period, Morrison said. Deferred rent can be paid back over the remaining lease period, or at least 24 months.
Despite signs that national cabinet was moving towards a system of using land tax reductions to encourage residential landlords to offer rent reductions, Morrison said residential tenancies will "now be dealt with directly by each of the state and territory jurisdictions".
The Australian Capital Territory has already announced a six-month scheme offering waivers of land tax capped at $1,300 a quarter, with the government to share rent reductions 50/50 with landlords.
On Tuesday, Labor's shadow housing minister, Jason Clare, praised the ACT plan as "a pretty smart idea" and "a great incentive for landlords and tenants to sit down and to work a way through this". Similar proposals are in development in other states, although some favour a less generous three-month period of land tax waivers.
On Tuesday, the industrial relations minister, Christian Porter, released final draft legislation of the government's $130bn jobkeeper legislation, to be debated on Wednesday and passed with Labor support.
Under the legislation, employers claiming the $1,500 fortnightly payment on behalf of employees would be allowed to activate a "jobkeeper enabling stand-down" and alter their employees' hours of work if they can't be usefully employed at their full hours as a result of Covid-19.
Employers will be able to alter the usual duties and location of employees' work, provided it is safe, reasonable, inside the employee's competency and the employer's usual scope of work.
Employers and employees can agree to vary the days worked, and agree to expend leave entitlements until just two weeks of annual leave remain, while the employer claims jobkeeper and pays it on to the employee. This must be by agreement, but an employee cannot "unreasonably refuse".
All three measures will be overseen by the Fair Work Commission, after negotiations of safeguards with the Australian Council of Trade Unions.