Australians' trust in government and media soars as coronavirus crisis escalates
Essential Research survey reveals public believe they are being kept informed and are subsequently following advice to change their behaviour
Follow the latest coronavirus developments in Australia liveSign up for Guardian Australia's daily coronavirus emailDownload the free Guardian app to get the most important news notifications
Essential Research survey reveals public believe they are being kept informed and are subsequently following advice to change their behaviour
Follow the latest coronavirus developments in Australia liveSign up for Guardian Australia's daily coronavirus emailDownload the free Guardian app to get the most important news notifications
Australians have a newfound trust in government and media as they digest confronting information about the Covid-19 pandemic.
They believe they have been kept informed and as a consequence have made substantial changes to personal behaviour over the past two weeks.
These and other findings from an Essential Research survey released Tuesday are encouraging indications Australians are absorbing advice and acting on it.
The survey found 78% of voters had increased hand washing, 82% were adding limits to social and shopping engagements, while kisses, handshakes and hugs had been abandoned by 78%.
Men are less likely than women to increase these basic precautions. Just 73% of men increased hygiene measures compared with 83% of women. Some 75% of men stopped hugging and handshaking, compared with 82% of women.
The proportion of voters who trust the government is giving honest and objective advice rose from 56% on 22 March to 63% last Monday.
Trust in the media to provide honest and objective information about Covid-19 jumped from 35% to 51% over the same two-week period.
Younger voters aged 18-34 – the least vulnerable to the coronavirus – are more likely than others to be critical of the response to it. Essential Research found 28% believed the response has been an overreaction.
Just 11% of the voters most at risk from the infection, those aged 55+, think there has been an overreaction; 47% in this cohort consider the response has been about right, and 42% think the threat is being underestimated.
The menace of the virus remains strong with 41% of all voters fearing they are very likely or somewhat likely to become a victim.
Strikingly, the most fatalistic age group is 18-34, of whom 49% say they are very or somewhat likely to catch Covid-19. That compares with those aged 55+, medically the most likely to be struck down, of whom 34% say they are likely to be victims.
Some 70% of voters believe they have been kept informed on the situation and the impact on families, according to the Essential Research. This compared with 63% just a week earlier.
And in a sign of confidence, some 52% of voters believe their finances will not be affected by the impact of the coronavirus, or that their savings will see them through.
But the dominant view, from 51%, was that the economy will be in trouble for six to 12 months, and grow slowly after that.
Households with dependent children are more worried about their financial futures, with 36% fearing they will struggle with a short-term loss of income, and a further 19% expecting to suffer serious financial stress.