Morrison has changed tack against his tribal instincts. But what happens after coronavirus?
The prime minister will rightly gain plaudits for managing Australia's response but support in a time of national crisis is ephemeral
After jettisoning key policies, embracing economic stimulus and taking a more decisive position on lockdowns and wages, the prime minister has enjoyed a resounding surge in personal support.
This turnaround echoes that of George Costanza, Jerry Seinfeld's hapless sidekick, who hit a winning streak after committing to do the exact opposite of his every natural instinct.
So too Scott Morrison: the states forced him to be more decisive on lockdowns, especially schools, while unions and businesses prevailed on him to reverse his earlier opposition to wage subsidy. This followed his new conversion to Keynesian economics, most recently injecting billions into free childcare, a notion ridiculed by his team as communism before the last election.
Full credit to Morrison and his government for changing tack and bringing more stakeholders to the decision-making table, but again this is something that would chafe with the PM's natural, more tribal instincts.
The "big tent" leadership approach is that which the Rudd government brought to the GFC and Bill Shorten would have been expected to adopt if he had been successful at last year's election when he ran on a "team" ticket. In contrast, Morrison's shtick was one man and a baseball cap.
But these are unprecedented times, and as this week's Essential Report shows, the public is ready to embrace someone who approaches leadership as a team game.
Like Costanza, the PM changed up from a position of relative weakness. The first weeks of the crisis had not been strong for the PM – the rating of 39% approval reflected the mixed messages, especially the Trumpian "I'm going to the footy" with a reluctance to step up distancing measures.
Thirty-nine per cent Morrison needed to play the team game. The question will be whether 59% Morrison recognises this cooperation is the foundation of his new authority or whether he reverts to typical Costanza-like behaviour.
The increase in approval for government comes in a week where the public appeared to (finally) twig to the reality of the crisis, with fewer people seeing the response as an underreaction.
Through the crisis the trends of trust in both government and media continue to rise, while the personal financial concerns have abated somewhat since the announcement of the jobkeeper allowance.
For opposition leader Anthony Albanese, this is a difficult period for different reasons. Having been left out of the national cabinet, Albanese is forced to lead from the sidelines.
This is reflected in the relatively flat response to the opposition leader's performance. No drop-off with the increased satisfaction in the PM, but no statistical relevant increase in his standing either.
There are important roles for the opposition in the here and now, scrutinising government decisions without being seen to block; Labor's role, for example, in the wage subsidy turnaround should not be underestimated.
But the political contest will be reloaded during the economic reconstruction. That's where we will learn whether the responses to a crisis of working together to co-create solutions can prevail.
What will be the rules governing any "snap back"? How will the rights of workers and citizens be reinstituted after the crisis? As Greg Jericho argued over the weekend, talk of socialism is overblown, the government's response still runs the risk of preserving interests of businesses over the interests of workers, and when "hibernation" ends there will be genuine contests over which will carry.
Will the tax system, for instance, continue to skew in favour of those with existing capital? Will the government persevere with its plans for a regressive flat tax? Who will bear the costs of bringing the budget back into balance?Will a party that has never believed in government have the wherewithal to think through ideas like joint equity and mutual ownership, or will they just revert to type and find the only solution in a corporate framework?
How will the government support new and newly relevant industries, as the reality of a globally constrained world demands new local capabilities and supply chains?
These broader questions, rather than the management of the crisis, will frame the choices voters make in 2022, a date that right now feels an eternity away.
The challenge in opposition right now is to think through and start the process of defining those choices.
Morrison will rightly gain plaudits for managing Australia's response, providing he continues to temper his natural instincts to go one out and divide. But even Winston Churchill could not translate that leadership into re-election after the second world war ended.
George H Bush made it to 89% after the first Gulf war, only to lose the presidency to Bill Clinton two years later. Even his son hit mid-80s after 9/11.
The reality for both leaders is that support in a time of national crisis is ephemeral, politics unites for a time but there will be time for a renewed contest in the months to come.
Peter Lewis will be discussing this week's report with Katharine Murphy at 1pm on Tuesday 7 April at Australia at Home's Political Geekfest.
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.