Lack of PPE forces Aboriginal health groups to stop testing for coronavirus
Shortages creating 'catastrophic' situation among vulnerable Indigenous groups with some services on brink of closing doors
A number of Aboriginal health groups in Victoria have been forced to cease Covid-19 testing and consider shutting their doors due to a lack of personal protective equipment.
The Guardian revealed last week that Aboriginal medical services in New South Wales, particularly in regional areas, were struggling to access the PPE needed to safely treat and test for the virus.
Some clinics had just two weeks of PPE left with no immediate prospect of re-supply, creating a situation they described as "catastrophic".
The Guardian understands the NSW government has now written to the commonwealth asking for the urgent release of supplies to the state's Aboriginal medical services and for direct access to the government's national medical stockpile.
The problem, though, is not confined to NSW.
In Victoria, Aboriginal community-controlled health organisations have warned they are facing "critical" PPE shortages, which have forced some into the difficult position of stopping Covid-19 testing until new stock is provided.
A number of Aboriginal health groups are making their own PPE to get by, according to the the Victorian Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation Inc (VACCHO), the peak body for Indigenous health and wellbeing in the state.
Others have considered closing entirely because they cannot source enough equipment.
VACCHO chair Karen Heap said the centre she runs in Ballarat – the Ballarat &amp; District Aboriginal Co-Operative – had run out of PPE and been forced to close temporarily last week.
The centre was conducting Covid-19 testing for Indigenous Australians and has since re-opened. But Heap says it only has one to two weeks of PPE left.
"We've struggled for quite a while," Heap told the Guardian. "We've run out. We found a few gowns that we could use, but we haven't got a good supply at all."
"We know we're not the only ones asking for PPE, it's across the nation. But we're trying to provide a service to the Aboriginal community across Victoria and we'd like to be able to help with testing.
"It just makes it easier for our community to come to our health services to get tested … they know us."
Aboriginal health services in both NSW and Victoria have been shifting to telehealth wherever possible to reduce demand on PPE and employing social distancing measures to protect staff and patients.
"We're actually in Ballarat just starting to make our own gowns as well, just in readiness, just in case we need them," Heap said. "We're hoping we don't need them, but if we do, we've got some people in our community who can sew, so we've put them to task,"
But Heap said if more equipment was not received soon, the consequences would be serious.
"We just won't be able to test at all and we'll have to be very careful about who we see through the clinic, especially people with the symptoms of the virus," she said.
The release of PPE from the federal government's national medical stockpile – a reserve of medical equipment held in secret locations across the country – is being prioritised to those who need it most.
The government has identified Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as a high-risk group during the Covid-19 pandemic, because of overall higher rates of respiratory disease, heart disease, and diabetes, as well as overcrowded housing.
A taskforce of experts in Indigenous health and epidemiology advising the national cabinet has released a detailed plan for dealing with the virus, which recommends urgent supplies of PPE and other medical equipment to regional and remote areas.
But, in a further sign of the severity of PPE shortages among Aboriginal medical services, NSW health minister Brad Hazzard and Aboriginal affairs minister Don Harwin wrote to federal health minister Greg Hunt asking for help last week.
It is understood the pair asked the federal government to urgently increase the supply of PPE to Aboriginal community-controlled health services in NSW.
They also asked that changes be made to allow Aboriginal medical services direct access to the national medical stockpile – an emergency reserve of medical equipment – rather than having to make their requests through the primary health network.
Such allowances have already been made for the aged care sector.
A NSW Health spokeswoman said the state and federal governments were working together to "urgently increase the supply of personal protective equipment (PPE) to Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services".
The state government has also provided a "one-off supply" of PPE to the sector in the week beginning 23 March, the spokeswoman said.
Hunt on Sunday announced that about 11m masks had recently been distributed to frontline workers, and that the national medical stockpile had been replenished by the receipt of 30m masks in recent weeks.
A spokeswoman said 1.6m surgical and P2 masks had been distributed to the NSW government in recent days.
"Significant additional supplies of masks have now arrived in Australia and the government is working with states and territories to allocate an initial additional 10 million masks to support front line healthcare professionals," she said.
"There are global shortages of masks and other PPE and the government is securing supplies to meet the demand of states and territories."
Hunt expects to make up to 200m masks available by the end of the year and finance minister, Mathias Cormann, announced an additional $800m for PPE supply on the weekend.
The government has attempted to help local manufacturers to pivot into PPE production and help existing producer Med-Con to boost its output.
The Aboriginal Health and Medical Research Council of NSW last week warned that clinics require urgent action to boost PPE stocks.