Labor to support jobkeeper package despite ineligibility of one million casuals
Industrial relations minister refuses to give ground over payment to casuals with less than 12 months' service
Labor has indicated it will support the government's $130bn jobkeeper wage subsidy package despite the industrial relations minister, Christian Porter, refusing to give ground on the eligibility of casuals with less than 12 months' service.
On Monday Porter said the Australian Council of Trade Unions proposal – that any casual who "reasonably expected" to remain employed but for the Covid-19 crisis should receive the $1,500 fortnightly payment – was "too broad and ill-defined".
The government's refusal means that one million casual employees with less than 12 months' service would be ineligible for the payment, and instead must claim the $1,100 jobseeker payment and coronavirus supplement.
The government has, however, softened the rules for registered charities, which will now only need to show a 15% reduction in turnover to qualify.
The changes ease eligibility for not-for-profit services including childcare centres, and raised the hopes of the university sector they would also benefit.
But on Monday the assistant charities minister, Zed Seselja, clarified that non-government schools and universities will have to meet the higher threshold of a 30% downturn.
Porter told reporters in Canberra the changes showed the government had "tried to be as inclusive as possible" but when it came to shorter term casuals missing out "there have to be some definitions and some lines drawn".
Asked to confirm the government will not extend eligibility, Porter replied that the definition of "systemic and regular employment with the same employer for a 12-month period" is in the Fair Work Act. "That's the definition."
Porter suggested casuals who miss out may not be much worse off because there is "going to be an equivalence between a casual worker who would receive jobkeeper … and someone who would have to go on to the jobseeker payment but also has the capacity to pick up work as well".
Porter said that some businesses "on the edge of viability can only afford to pay a worker the $1,500 jobkeeper amount".
"So the structural problem that the legislation needs to deal with … [is that] unless we change the Fair Work Act, we cannot guarantee that a worker can lawfully work the right amount of hours for the $1,500 payment."
The government's bill, seen by the ACTU and soon to be sent to Labor ahead of debate and a vote on Wednesday, rectifies the situation by allowing employers to vary their employees' hours up or down to the number covered by the $1,500 at the regular rate of pay.
Porter argued the alternative, changing 120 modern awards, would take "weeks if not months" to complete – although unions dispute this, citing the fact employers have nominated just 15 awards that must urgently change in their negotiations.
"I've described it as $130bn worth of lifeboats going out," Porter said. "This is parliament's Dunkirk moment. We get the lifeboats out, and we save jobs, and we do it in the simplest, clearest guaranteed formula that parliament can devise."
Dominique Lamb, the National Retail Association chief executive officer, told Guardian Australia she supports unions' push to expand eligibility because "if you're in employment you should be eligible for jobkeeper".
Lamb said the retail industry is diverse, with many entering the workforce without English as a first language, and her members had concerns that there was no safety net for temporary visa holders, many of whom had families that were not eligible for any type of welfare.
In addition to expanding eligibility to shorter term casuals and temporary visa-holders, Labor would prefer changes be implemented to awards rather than the Fair Work Act, to accommodate union concerns that employers not experiencing financial distress would seek to benefit by forcing workers to run down their leave and cutting their hours.
But on Monday the manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, conceded he could not imagine any circumstances under which Labor would oppose the bill.
Burke told reporters in Sydney that the Fair Work Commission could move at "lightning speed" and the changes to hours would be "simple and fast" in most awards, while avoiding the "unintended consequences" of legislative change.
For example, Burke suggested the system could be open to "abuses" such as an employer directing an employee whose regular hours did not amount to $1,500 in pay to then cook and clean at the employer's home.
Burke – who has identified that millions of workers could be left without leave due to a loophole in jobkeeper – warned the payment was "meant to be a wage subsidy" but on current drafting employers could "take it for themselves" by using it to pay down accrued leave entitlements.
Earlier, Porter sought to allay concern about the legislation, insisting the changes will only last for six months.
He also pointed to a "secondary requirement about the viability of the business, and the necessity to give a direction around hours worked to save the job of the employee in question".
Porter said the Fair Work Commission would be able to review an employer direction "so that there will be safeguards in the process of trying to make the hours match the $1,500 payments".
Childcare centres, non-government schools and private educational providers have emerged as potential winners from eligibility changes for charities.
Goodstart Early Learning said it was "very relieved" to learn that it was now eligible to apply for the $1,500 per fortnight subsidy for its staff.
"Access to the jobkeeper payments is vital as it will ensure that we can trade through this very difficult time," the chief executive, Julia Davison, said in a statement.
Seselja said the "15% decline in the turnover threshold is aimed at charities like the Salvation Army and Catholic Social Services Australia".
"Non-government schools and universities are eligible for the jobkeeper payment.
"However, they will need to meet the turnover threshold of 30% for those with an annual turnover of less than $1 billion."