Morrison reminds us nothing lasts forever – especially the coronavirus spending spree
It's a gauge of the PM's optimism the Covid-19 menace will be defeated that he is already preparing us for the moment the cash taps are turned off
Scott Morrison calls it "the snapback" – the stinging moment when $200bn or more in special spending is turned off and life returns to pre-pandemic normality.
It might seem premature, but the federal government is preparing the electorate for this moment, when the cash taps are turned off. And it has a strong political motivation.
Not all reversions to the old ways will be applauded, and the government won't have the money to keep emergency schemes going.
The snapback is the moment when, for example, parents find childcare is no longer free to them and employers have to return to the old industrial relations battlefield.
It is a gauge of the prime minister's optimism the Covid-19 menace will be defeated, and his apprehensions of how a return to our previous national life will be greeted, that he already is urging voters to accept there will be a change back to pre-pandemic programs.
Further, the government wants immediately to smother suggestions the cost of its response will force it into policy positions it has fought against previously – such as elimination of the franking credits tax relief.
Morrison told reporters on Thursday that everything old will be back again, saying "there is a snapback to the previous existing arrangements on the other side of this".
The major measures designed to combat the spread of the virus and compensate its financial victims have been built to run for a finite lifetime, to inevitably self-destruct. At a specific time, yet to be determined, they will switch off.
But a problem for the government is some of them will leave an imprint on the national debate. One legacy of the crisis, for example, could be a renewed campaigning for a universal basic income, given the temporary precedent of the jobkeeper payments.
Industrial relations minister Christian Porter on Thursday seemed to indicated some changes in his area were here to stay.
"It probably is fair to say that there has been the type of change in three weeks inside the award system that you might otherwise wait 30 years to see," Porter told reporters.
But the government is insisting nothing is forever.
There are no structural changes being made which would last beyond the emergency, Morrison told reporters on Thursday, in a explanation of his strategy and yet another shot at Labor's handling of the GFC.
Referring to decisions 12 years ago, he said: "When we went through this last time there were long tails of expenditure and there were structural changes to expenditure."
The lingering question is when things will snap back.
That moment might not arrive for a year, although the prime minister has repeatedly suggested a six-month schedule, which probably is being dictated by the exhaustion of revenue.
By any reasonable forecast Morrison will still be leader when it happens.
Voters will have to accept that the big guns of the government responses to Covid-19 have to be retired because the cost of keeping them on the battlefield could not be sustained.