Media deal with Facebook and Google more urgent with coronavirus taking jobs, says regulator
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission pushing for code of conduct to ensure news businesses on digital platforms are treated fairly
An agreement between the media companies and the digital giants such as Google and Facebook is more urgent than ever as the coronavirus decimates an already struggling industry, Australia's competition regulator has said.
Chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, Rod Sims, said he was confident a new code regulating the relationship between Facebook, Google and Australian media would be in place by November and earlier if the government chooses to step in.
A key recommendation of the ACCC's digital platforms inquiry was to introduce a code of conduct to ensure news businesses on digital platforms are treated fairly and transparently.
"Our media companies are in great difficulty, so that bargaining code that we're facilitating between the media companies and the platforms is just all that more urgent," Sims told ABC radio.
"I think they were very much weakened by the impact of the digital platforms. It's been a one-two blow: digital platforms and then corona."
News Corp Australasia executive chairman Michael Miller repeated calls for the government to force digital platforms to pay for the content they profit from after suspending printing 60 community newspapers, some of which date back to the 1860s.
Miller said Covid-19 did not create the crisis in the media but "brought it to a head".
"The unfairness of the digital playing field, along with Australia's draconian tangle of legislation and regulation means local companies can't compete with international platforms," Miller said.
Rupert Murdoch's chief executive in Australia said News Corp had been talking to the digital platforms but had not even got to "first base" and had no confidence a voluntary code of conduct would work.
"The government should be ready to institute a mandatory code," he said.
Sims told Guardian Australia the pandemic had not slowed down the commission's efforts to facilitate an enforceable agreement between the media and Facebook and Google but he doubted the timetable could be sped up.
He said the ACCC report on the progress of negotiations would be out in May.
"The government has said that if in May they haven't made progress we'll step in and mandate a code," Sims said.
In the meantime Sims urged the government to enhance the regional and innovation grants scheme to help the regional papers which were struggling with no advertising.
"If they want to do something immediately they could do that," he said.
"Journalism is fundamental to society," Sims said. "We want both the national coverage, which is what the Guardian does, we also want the local coverage and if this year 2020 can be the year of focused attention on journalism and the media that would be terrific."
Communications minister Paul Fletcher said it was clear Covid-19 had put the media sector under enormous pressure, particularly through sharp advertising downturns.
In recent days Nine Entertainment, Seven West Media and News Corp have told staff they have to introduce tough measures to get them through the economic shutdown including pay cuts and working shorter hours.
"The current situation has amplified the long-running structural issues – particularly competition from global digital platforms which are capturing much of the audience and advertising revenue previously held by television, radio and newspapers," Fletcher said.
News Corp's decision reflects the fact that advertising which is the mainstay of its community newspapers – from sectors like real estate and hospitality – has largely dried up due to Covid-19.
"I welcome the fact that News Corp is maintaining these titles in digital form, and I welcome News Corp's commitment to preserve jobs."