Australian childcare operators fear they will have to close without a government lifeline
Worried parents are increasingly pulling their children out of services amid the coronavirus crisis
Childcare operators fear they will have to shut their doors and lay off staff without an urgent lifeline from the Australian government, as worried parents increasingly pull their children out of services.
The next national cabinet meeting on Friday is due to discuss the early childhood sector, but operators say the need is immediate and they have already had to retrench educators or reduce hours because of the steep decline in children's attendance amid the coronavirus crisis.
Many in the sector have called for a change to the existing rules around fee charging. Currently, parents have to continue paying the "gap" between the childcare subsidy and the centre's fee, even during absences.
This situation is leading some families to cancel their enrolments altogether, meaning centres no longer receive the childcare subsidy that accounts for a large part of their revenue. That is putting the future viability of childcare centres at risk.
Monique Atack, the director of Hunny Pots Early Learning Centre in Glenwood, New South Wales, said the centre usually had 56 children, but over the past two weeks an average of just 15 were attending each day. More than 10% of parents had cancelled their children's enrolment altogether, with that share growing by the day.
"We made our first redundancy yesterday, which was heartbreaking. Being a family-owned business, our staff is our family," Atack said, adding that staff members had also had their hours reduced.
"They [the government] have got to act and it's got to be immediate. If they don't, we're going to really suffer."
Early Childhood Australia, a peak body, estimates that across most of the nation, about 650 early childhood education and care services – or 4% – have already closed. While those figures largely comprise outside school hours care, it also includes some long day-care centres. The data collected so far do not include Tasmania and the Northern Territory.
The peak body's chief executive, Samantha Page, called on the government to continue to pay services the childcare subsidy based on enrolment numbers in the first week of March, before the steep drop in attendance.
The childcare subsidy accounted for about 60% of the revenue of childcare centres, Page said. She said the government should also waive the contribution required to be charged to parents when the children were absent.
"It doesn't mean that everybody could continue to be employed at the same hours, but it would certainly secure a good proportion of jobs," Page said.
She said this proposal would be a better support than the recently announced jobkeeper payment, because services may not reach the drop in turnover threshold. She did not want to see centres put in a position of potentially having to close – with their turnover therefore vanishing – in order to be eligible for the new wages subsidy of $1,500 per fortnight per worker.
The country's biggest childcare operator, Goodstart Early Learning, said its 665 centres remained open but were experiencing increasing numbers of absences. Goodstart told its 3,000 casual educators last week that it was no longer able to provide them with ongoing work.
The chief executive of Goodstart, Julia Davison, said many of these educators were "extremely distressed" and looking for assurances that the organisation would be able to provide assistance through the government's recently announced jobkeeper payment program. The group is seeking clarity from the government about its eligibility.
"Goodstart Early Learning urgently requires access to the jobkeeper scheme and a viability package to keep our centres open and retain our dedicated highly trained educators and teachers through the next six months in order to continue the essential support we provide for vulnerable children and essential services workers," Davison said.
Helen Gibbons, the United Workers Union's director of early childhood education, said parents were un-enrolling their children from childcare to avoid having to pay the gap fee, which in turn was costing educators either their jobs or their normal rostered hours.
"What we've seen in the first wave is all of the casuals losing their hours and a fairly significant part of the sector is staffed by casuals," Gibbons said. These developments were "tragic". But changes to stop charging the gap fee could help "keep the centres alive".
Gibbons said educators had also been organising for centres to implement additional safety measures to avoid Covid-19 spreading, including temperature checks before children entered each day, as social distancing was impractical in these contexts.
"You can't change a nappy from 1.5 metres away," she said.
Last month the government made some changes, including increasing to 62 the number of days that a childcare service would continue to receive the childcare subsidy when a child was absent from care. It has also pointed to a grants scheme for special circumstances.
However, Labor's early childhood education spokesperson, Amanda Rishworth, said the government needed to announce a more comprehensive solution right away.
"There's already a direct relationship between the centres and the government. The government is already paying them a subsidy. Make it as simple as possible: pay the subsidy and keep them open."
Federal, state and territory education ministers are considering regulatory, funding and viability measures. An announcement is expected after the national cabinet of leaders meets on Friday.