Laughing in the face of lockdown: comedy videos to raise your spirits
Self-isolating comedians are working from home to bring a little light relief to the nation. Here's a roundup of some of the funniest
See all our coronavirus coverageCoronavirus and culture – a list of major cancellations
Self-isolating comedians are working from home to bring a little light relief to the nation. Here's a roundup of some of the funniest
See all our coronavirus coverageCoronavirus and culture – a list of major cancellations
Stevenage builder buddies Lee and Dean are back, though Dean is self-isolating on the other side of the double glazing. Luckily, Lee is on hand to provide the essentials.
Britain's Biggest Bridezilla Georgina Francis, created by Anna Morris, is locked down in her luxury Cotswolds holiday home. But that won't stop her sharing an inspiring poem for the nation.
Kae Kurd recalls the joy of working from home before the coronavirus outbreak – and faces up to the grim new reality of 24/7 flatmates.
Tom Allen sizes up the competitive home-schoolers in this instalment of his magazine show, Locked In, accompanied by his inflatable green co-host, Linda.
Elf Lyons's aspiring singer-songwriter Saint Bernard isolates during the millennium bug and offers an unlikely cover version of John Cage's 4'33".
Drop that dirty beat: BenDeLaCreme gives a helpful 20-second tutorial in hand-washing (but turn that tap off, eh?).
Mawaan Rizwan decides to try out a new comedy character but his sister fails to see the funny side.
Lauren Silver and her sabre-toothed tiger present a 60-second guide to pandemic anxiety.
Guz Khan has a go at doing yoga and discovers pains in new places.
Pierre Novellie returns to his original love, doodling, and spends an hour of self-isolation drawing a creepy elf.
Listen up to Baked Potato in this very important public service announcement from Matt Lucas.
Just because the clubs are closed, it doesn't mean you can't dance – take it from London Hughes.
If you can't stomach the real news every night then Laura Lexx, AKA White Teeth McSerious Face, has an alternative update for you in News Drip!