Hull Trains becomes first British operator to suspend all services
Chief of rail operator says decision is aimed at protecting its long-term future
Hull Trains is to become the first British rail operator to suspend all services, after cancelling trains between London and the port city until further notice due to the "unprecedented circumstances" caused by coronavirus.
The company, part of rail operator FirstGroup, said it has been forced into the decision to safeguard the future of the business, after passenger numbers dwindled following government advice to avoid nonessential travel.
Most routes on the UK rail network have been stripped back because of decreased demand but Hull Trains is the first company to stop running altogether.
The government has also suspended rail franchises in England because of the pandemic, relieving the companies that run them of financial risk.
Hull Trains is not a franchise owner but an open access operator, which takes the full commercial risk of its business rather than sharing it with the government.
Open access train companies buy the right to run trains on government infrastructure, in order to foster competition with franchise companies. Government-owned LNER also runs a service between London and Hull, after a joint venture between Stagecoach and Virgin Group was stripped of the franchise.
As one of three such firms in the country, Hull Trains has not been offered additional financial support from the government, which franchised rail operators have.
Louise Cheeseman, the managing director of Hull Trains, said that suspending services was a difficult decision but it would help keep the business alive.
"We have explored every avenue to try to keep trains running but sadly it is not currently financially viable to run our services," she said, adding that the company will resume services as soon as it can.
"It's been a very difficult week for the business but the reluctant decision to temporarily suspend services is the right one based on the current unprecedented circumstances and I hope our passengers understand this.
"The move protects the long-term future of Hull Trains and our people's jobs, which is important as it will allow us to reinstate operations quickly when possible."Mick Cash, the general secretary of transport union RMT, said: "This decision affects 130 rail staff around the Hull area and they must be treated as an absolute priority.
"We expect the company and the government to guarantee wages at 100% and not some reduced rate and we also expect jobs, service, pensions and conditions for these rail staff to be fully protected throughout this crisis.
"We will be in direct talks to secure our members the guarantees they are entitled to. The government has given the rail companies financial assurances and the same must apply to staff."