Anywhere but Westminster: we need your help covering the coronavirus
For our second episode we want to focus on work, and what the Covid-19 outbreak has done to it. Share your experience
Anywhere but Westminster's new video series is moving on to its second instalment. We're working from home, and collecting video people are sending us from around the country. It's giving us a sense of how they are being affected, and the ways individuals and communities are coming together to help each other. Massive thanks for all the footage that's been sent in so far, it's great, and keep it coming: anything that is inspiring, or made you laugh, or any idea you think could be copied elsewhere.
For episode two we also want to focus on work, and what the Covid-19 outbreak has done to it. Are you in precarious work? Is what you're doing suddenly difficult and dangerous? Have you lost your job, and are trying to navigate universal credit? Are you self-employed, and waiting for payments just announced by the government that may not materialise for more than a month? We want to hear from you.
If you fancy shooting video, it's hugely important that you observe the physical distancing rules. Record a video diary of what's happening to you, but also turn your phone or camera the other way round, and give us a sense of your immediate surroundings. Any flavour of people's working lives is great: what they're having to do, things that are now challenging, their journey to and from their job.
Shoot landscape rather than portrait. If you can send us video, you can email it or use an FTP service, such as WeTransfer. If there are things we should know about, maybe for future episodes, send us an email. Thanks again for everyone's work and help. We're thrilled that the idea is working.
If you want to send a video now, you can email us at anywhere.but.westminster@the guardian.com but if you want to get in touch with us then please share your details in our encrypted form below. Only the Guardian will see your responses.
If you're having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.