Pregnant Covid-19 patient: 'Stop going out'
Heavily pregnant woman with double pneumonia urges people to stay home
Struggling to breathe, a heavily pregnant British woman has pleaded with people to stop going out as she battles coronavirus in hospital.
In a video posted to Facebook on Wednesday, Karen Mannering said she had pneumonia in both lungs and had been ill for two weeks.
"I'm fighting for me and my baby," Mannering, 39, said with an oxygen tube in her nose. "I've got three kids at home and a husband who I can't see. I don't know where I've caught it from but I'm very ill. This is horrendous."
Mannering, a beauty therapist from Herne Bay, Kent, is six and half months pregnant and found out after four days in hospital that she had tested positive for Covid-19.
In a video from her hospital bed she begged people to stay at home. "I'm telling you now, if you are going to meet your friend for a stupid beer or a sea walk because the weather is nice, you are going to take this home and you are going to kill someone, one of your family members.
"Stop going out and listen to Boris. Just don't go out, it's not worth it."
The World Health Organization has said there is no evidence that pregnant women are at higher risk of severe illness than the general population if they contract Covid-19, but the UK government has advised them to minimise social contact for up to 12 weeks.
Mannering posted a video update on Thursday to say she had come off oxygen for the first time in five days, but was still struggling to breathe as she sat up in bed.
"So this is me managing to sit up, only for a minute but it's a start. I have to do this now, push myself, because I've got to do this for me and the baby, I've got to," she said through laboured breathing. "It is absolutely incredible, this is me sitting up, after a minute."
She added: "I'm making small, small steps now, the nurses are encouraging me and telling me I need to do this for me and my son."
This article was amended on 27 March 2020. An earlier version said Karen Mannering had a breathing tube in her nose. It was a nasal oxygen tube.