Firefighters and retired emergency staff to help tackle coronavirus in UK
Ex-police and ambulance workers urged to return, as firefighters set to drive ambulances
Firefighters, retired police officers and former ambulance workers are being drafted in to help tackle the "unparalleled" coronavirus crisis in an attempt to stop the NHS becoming overwhelmed.
It comes as one in five police officers are off sick or self-isolating in areas worst hit by the virus.
The Met, which is Britain's biggest force, is already understood to be experiencing absentee rates of 20%. This already high figure comes before London hits its peak, with officers and staff missing because they have contracted the virus or are having to self-isolate.
Absentee rates for other forces is averaging about 10%, and is predicted to rise to about 25% as the virus spreads in their areas.
Enforcing the government's lockdown is adding to pressure on police numbers. Policing a lockdown was not planned for, in the organisation that forces did in the weeks before the crisis started.
Under an agreement between the Fire Brigades Union and employers, firefighters have been authorised to drive ambulances to deliver medicines, and retrieve bodies.
Matt Wrack, the FBU general secretary, said: "Many fear the loss of life in this outbreak could be overwhelming – and firefighters, who often handle terrible situations and incidents, are ready to step in to assist with body retrieval."
In London, the area worst hit by the virus, retired police and ambulance workers are also being asked to return to work to relieve pressure on the overstretched emergency services.
Both the Metropolitan police and the London ambulance service have appealed for former staff to return. The Metropolitan police said its officers were being asked to return for up to six months.
The ambulance service tweeted: "We are asking former members of our team to consider returning, if they can, to support us in helping Londoners in need. We're particularly keen to hear from former 111 and 999 control room team staff."
The Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, is to write to all officers who retired within the past five years to ask them to rejoin either in a paid or voluntary capacity. Serving officers who are nearing 30 years' pensionable service are also being asked to delay their retirement.
Wrack said: "We face a public health crisis unparalleled in our lifetimes. The coronavirus outbreak is now a humanitarian emergency and firefighters rightly want to help their communities."
Speaking on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, he said: "Firefighters are clearly keen to do whatever they can to help in the situation."
Wrack added there was a "need to protect core functions" of the fire service while firefighters may be asked to take on additional roles.
He said: "I think this is a huge challenge across public services and also clearly we need to ensure that firefighters and others are protected in terms of personal protective equipment because no one can do their job if their own safety is compromised."
In a statement he added: "Firefighters are fantastic at teamwork, are experienced in driving emergency vehicles and, as a service rooted in the community, may be best placed to deliver essential items to the most vulnerable.
"Firefighters and control staff have always stepped in when the public has been in danger and this crisis is no different. The strain on all emergency services will be great, but we can and will get through it together."
Dick said: "Demands on us will grow and vary over the coming weeks but I want people to know and see that the Met is here for them. We must maintain our operational resilience and continue to provide the best possible service to London.
"I am hopeful that these exceptionally experienced and knowledgeable former colleagues choose to come and be part of our team and support London at this extraordinary time – either as a re-employed police officer, special constable or a volunteer."