Six in 10 people in UK have felt anxious about coronavirus – poll
Survey shows how pandemic is affecting mental health – and suggests what can help
Millions of people in the UK are feeling panicked and unprepared for the coronavirus outbreak, according to a poll showing how the virus is affecting mental health.
The survey, carried out before a full lockdown was imposed, found that more than one in five adults in the UK had felt panicked and three in 10 had felt afraid because of coronavirus. More than six in 10 adults (62%) said they had felt anxious or worried.
"This poll was carried out before full lockdown was introduced. Even then, there were clear indications that the pandemic was beginning to have a significant impact on the nation's mental health," said Dr Antonis Kousoulis, the director of research at the Mental Health Foundation, which commissioned the YouGov poll.
He said the concern was that the longer mental health problems persisted, the worse they would become. "Among the issues we will need to monitor are impacts on levels of trauma, suicidal thoughts and mental health vulnerability."
He added: "That is why it is incredibly important that we act now. We are not powerless. There are many things we can do, individually and collectively, to tackle and prevent mental health problems, with much help and advice available."
The poll found that nearly one in three people had felt unprepared, one in 10 had felt lonely and nearly one in five (18%) had felt hopeless.
The findings will form part of a larger study that will monitor the impact of coronavirus on mental health, a project launched by the Mental Health Foundation in partnership with the Institute of Public Health at the University of Cambridge.
Kousoulis said there was some good news among the findings, with people showing empathy for others and willingness to help. "Volunteering is one of the things that research shows helps improve our mental health and the mental health of others," he said.
Mental health charities say the coronavirus pandemic is causing increased stress and anxiety, particularly among people with existing mental health problems.
The World Health Organization has acknowledged that the crisis is generating stress and has advised people to avoid watching, reading or listening to news that causes feelings of anxiety or distress.
Stephen Buckley, of the mental health charity Mind, said: "We know that the coronavirus and its impact are causing stress and worry for many people. If you already have a mental health problem, it's possible that the worries of coronavirus may be affecting how you're coping."
Quarantine or self-isolation is likely to have a negative impact on mental wellbeing. A review of the psychological impact of quarantine, published in the Lancet in February, said: "Separation from loved ones, the loss of freedom, uncertainty over disease status, and boredom, can on occasion create dramatic effects. Suicide has been reported, substantial anger generated, and lawsuits brought following the imposition of quarantine in previous outbreaks.
"The potential benefits of mandatory mass quarantine need to be weighed carefully against the possible psychological costs."
The Mental Health Foundation offers advice on mental health issues relating to the pandemic, which can be found here.
YouGov polled 2,126 people over the age of 18 on 17 and 18 March.
In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.