Care workers move into Sheffield dementia home to shield residents
Staff leave behind families to reduce risk of infecting vulnerable residents
A group of care workers have left their families and moved into a care home for a "lock-in" with residents to help protect them from the coronavirus.
At Bridgedale House, in Sheffield, nine staff members have packed their bags and said goodbye to loved ones in order to move into the facility full-time, reducing the risk of them infecting vulnerable residents.
Sarah-Jane Clark, 23, a care assistant, is one of those who volunteered to move in, leaving behind her fiance and her parents, with whom she usually lives.
"I'm used to doing the long shifts, we all are," she said. "We do the job because we care. But usually we get to go home every day to our families and our loved ones. I think that's going to be the hardest part for us all."
The care home is now effectively locked down, with staff members staying put and no visitors allowed, although family members can leave letters and gifts outside the main door.
Along with the rest of the team, Clark will be doing 12-hour shifts seven days a week in order to provide round-the-clock care. The group will be sleeping in spare rooms and a training room.
They plan to make regular video calls to their families and are also using technology to help relatives of residents keep in contact. "Obviously it's hard for [the residents] as well, they're going a long time without seeing their family," said Clark.
The care home, a private specialist facility for people with dementia, has 23 residents, all aged 65 and over. Despite the lockdown, the team is staying vigilant for signs of the virus, with all staff and residents having their temperatures checked every morning.
"We are trying not to speak too much about it with residents because it's upsetting and we don't want to worry them too much," said Clark. "And obviously it's worrying for us because we're also thinking about our families at home and we don't want them to get ill."
The new live-in team includes seven care workers, a chef and a domestic worker, with some having to leave behind children and vulnerable family members.
Kirsty Scott, a senior care assistant, said goodbye to her two children, aged eight and five. "My daughter was obviously a bit upset when I left. My son's autistic, so he kind of gets it. I promised him we're going to Thomas Land when it's all over, so he's happy."
Scott said she was worried about the possibility not only of bringing the virus into Bridgedale House but also of taking it home, as her husband is diabetic and her daughter has asthma. "The risk was too much," she said. "It was a hard decision to leave my kids and husband, but I want to be able to look after my residents. We love our residents. We are a family."
Relatives of the residents have been sending messages of encouragement to the team. "We are so lucky that you and your amazing staff look after our mum. Thank you from the bottom of our hearts for being mum's family whilst we can't be there – we will never forget this," said one Facebook message.
The group is preparing to live in the home for at least two weeks, with another team of staff ready to take over when they're called upon. Clark said: "You see a lot of people talking about NHS workers, however nothing is really being said about [care workers] and the sacrifices we're making.
"I think it's just important that we stay positive. We're a good team. We work well together, it's a home from home environment. We're all quite close and we pull together when it's necessary."
She added: "We're going to miss our families. But it's important that we do it to take care of our residents. God forbid anything was to happen to them. We've got to put them first."