UK telecoms firms unite on campaign to avoid network outage
Seven tips offered to reduce pressure on broadband, phone and mobile services during coronavirus lockdown
Britain's biggest telecoms companies including BT, Sky, O2, Vodafone and Virgin Media have put their rivalries aside to launch a national campaign to tell the public how to manage the surge in internet and mobile phone usage and reduce congestion on networks as millions are confined to their homes.
The unprecedented union of the UK's leading broadband, pay-TV and mobile phone companies comes days after the prime minister, Boris Johnson, moved to shut Britain's high streets and ordered the public to stay indoors to contain the spread of the coronavirus.
The campaign, coordinated by media regulator Ofcom, will run across digital and social media as well as direct communications to the tens of millions of customers signed up to broadband, mobile and TV deals with the UK's largest providers.
"Families across the country are going online together this week, often juggling work and keeping children busy at the same time," said Melanie Dawes, the chief executive of Ofcom. "So we're encouraging people to read our advice on getting the most from their broadband, home phones and mobiles."
The information campaign, called Stay Connected, offers seven tips to reduce pressure on networks including staggering family activity, switching off wifi on devices that aren't being used, and choosing a landline or wifi calling over using a mobile network.
The campaign follows European commission officials reaching agreements with Netflix, Amazon's Prime Video, YouTube, and the newest entry in the streaming wars, Disney+, to reduce streaming video speeds for 30 days to cut the weight of internet traffic in the UK and Europe. Sony has also capped the speed at which European players can download PlayStation games, though it said that multiplayer gaming would not be affected.
The French government went as far as asking that Disney+, which launched in the UK and six western European markets on Tuesday, to wait until 7 April to launch, over fears that under virus lockdown, the popularity of hits such as the Star Wars live action spin-off The Mandalorian might hobble the national broadband network.
As the coronavirus lockdowns go global, so too does the strain on service providers. YouTube announced it would reduce streaming speeds around the world on Tuesday, while Facebook has warned that even its own systems are struggling: the company has experienced huge increases in use in countries hit by the virus, including a 1,000% growth in group calls by time in Italy over the last month.
"The usage growth from Covid-19 is unprecedented across the industry, and we are experiencing new records in usage almost every day," said Jay Parikh, Facebook's vice-president of engineering. "Maintaining stability throughout these spikes in usage is more challenging than usual now that most of our employees are working from home."
Oliver Dowden, the UK culture secretary, said: "Right now we need people to stay at home to protect the NHS and save lives. Reliable internet speeds will be crucial so we can work from home where possible, stay connected with our families and keep up to date with the latest health information."
Despite being a global laggard in the rollout of full-fibre broadband, the gold standard of internet speed available to just 10% of homes nationwide, the UK's telecoms companies remain supremely confident that the national network can handle the traffic load exacerbated by the shift to working at home and the closure of schools. The surge of stay-at-home activities has been symbolised by the huge popularity of a livestream YouTube workout by Joe Wicks, the celebrity fitness expert who runs a daily PE class that has attracted more than a million families.
While the UK's broadband network appears ready to take the traffic increase, there is concern about the mobile phone network. Last week, the amount of mobile phone calls made by at-home workers temporarily overloaded the system that connects the UK's mobile operators. Mobile operator O2 had a 50% surge in the number of phonecalls on the day of the network collapse, with calls on average lasting 40% longer than usual. On Friday, ministers, Ofcom and telecoms chiefs discussed the issue, with reassurances given that networks could handle months of lockdown conditions.