Private health firm to create 10,000 new jobs for carers
Cera Care will train new home carers for the elderly and vulnerable around the country
Private healthcare company Cera Care is creating 10,000 new jobs for home carers to support elderly or vulnerable people during the coronavirus outbreak, and to provide work for those who have lost their jobs.
The firm said it will offer successful applicants training courses and assessments through its digital platform, allowing them to become formally certified as carers and able to start earning money after 10 days.
The home care company said it wants people who have lost their jobs in retail, hospitality, travel or other sectors during the outbreak to apply for the roles, which involve providing care to elderly or vulnerable people in their own home.
Cera Care, which employs 2,000 people nationwide, is creating positions across the UK.
Horus Patel, Cera's chief technology officer, said the firm is using its existing technology to help people return to work, and that the roles are intended to last beyond the peak of the outbreak.
"These are long-term positions within our company, and we hope this will encourage those recently left without work, or even those currently employed, to consider getting trained and becoming part of this crucial community," Patel said.
The government has advised eight million people aged over 70, or 12% of the UK population, as well as those with pre-existing medical conditions, to remain at home and avoid unnecessary social contact for at least 12 weeks to protect themselves from the spread of Covid-19. Cera Care says on its website that its carers are "trained to reduce the risk of infection".
The London-based firm, which was founded in November 2016, currently provides more than 10,000 care visits each day.
Cera, which is regulated by the Care Quality Commission, says it improves care services for elderly people through data analytics.
In addition, Cera's app can provide family members and medical workers with current information about an individual's health.
Cera has partnerships with organisations such as the NHS, Uber, Deliveroo and IBM.