Emergency coronavirus legislation passed by MPs without opposition
No 10 says sweeping powers will be subject to renewal every six months amid Commons pressure
We would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died from Covid-19. You can get in touch by filling in the form below, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your contributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss further.
No 10 says sweeping powers will be subject to renewal every six months amid Commons pressure
Emergency legislation giving sweeping powers to ban gatherings and forcibly quarantine suspected coronavirus patients was passed by MPs on Monday night, despite continued worries about civil liberties and the potential effect on vulnerable people.
The coronavirus bill, which will be in force for two years, completed all its stages through the Commons in one day without opposition MPs forcing any votes after Downing Street offered the concession that it would be reviewed every six months.
Labour welcomed the move, but expressed concern at some of the measures in the 329-page bill, which will go to the Lords later in the week, notably changes to rules over mental health and the provision of social care.
Clauses suspend existing duties requiring councils to meet the eligible needs of vulnerable older people, disabled people, and young adults with social care needs about to leave the children's care system.
Part of the bill will allow councils to prioritise care for those they consider most at risk if adult social care services become overwhelmed by surging demand or staff absences. But charities warned this could put vulnerable people at risk.
Disability Rights UK said: "Given the already broken social care system, this bill will almost inevitably leave many thousands of disabled people without essential support or any rights to request this support. Rolling back our rights is not good for anyone and in the current circumstances will put many lives at risk."
Opening the Commons debate on the bill, Matt Hancock, the health secretary, said the scale of the threat posed by coronavirus necessitated "extraordinary measures of the kind never seen before in peacetime".
Hancock said: "Of course there are significant departures from the way we normally do things, but they are strictly temporary, and I think they are proportionate to the threat we face and they'll only be activated on the basis of the best possible scientific evidence."
Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said that while robust measures were necessary to save lives, on social care it should "not be possible for local authorities to immediately drop care packages to a lower level".
He said Labour opposed the change that would allow people with mental illness to be sectioned on the approval of just one doctor, rather than two, saying: "Our medical professionals are going to be under huge pressure over the coming months and mistakes may well be made."
Earlier, one key battle was averted as No 10 gave way on the demand for a regular review of the bill's powers, following concerns from Labour and other opposition parties, as well as some Conservative MPs.
Ahead of the first stage of the bill in the Commons, Boris Johnson's spokesman said the measures would now be reviewed every six months. "We recognise the importance of parliamentary scrutiny and have heard concerns about the need for periodic reviews of the powers in the bill," he said.
Shami Chakrabarti, the shadow attorney general, said: "Many of us would prefer even more frequent reviews, but given the particular challenges of this crisis, we are glad that the government seems to have moved some way towards the compromise offered by Labour in the constitutional and public interest."
Clive Lewis, one of the Labour MPs who raised concerns, said real concerns remained: "This pandemic should not be used as cover for what could be described as an executive coup, if it goes ahead as configured. There are real concerns about our right to protest through to care for the disabled."
Among possible powers in the bill is for police, public health and immigration officers to detain people suspected of having Covid-19, to force them to isolate, and to fine them if they refuse a test.
-tributes-and-memories
Other elements of the bill give legal force to the closure of schools and nurseries, allow ministers to ban gatherings, and gives extra intervention powers if the government suspects anyone is disrupting the distribution of food. Another element would permit the closure of the UK's borders if too many border staff fell ill.
Other measures intended to ease pressures on the NHS would allow recently retired medical staff and students who have nearly qualified to work immediately, with protection given against any negligence claims. Other provisions are connected to improving access to statutory sick pay, and speeding up the process for funerals.