'Devastating': vicar and headteacher among latest UK coronavirus victims
Tributes paid to named victims, including Holocaust survivor William Stern
We would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died from Covid-19. You can get in touch by filling in the form below, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your contributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss further.
Tributes paid to named victims, including Holocaust survivor William Stern
A primary headteacher and a Holocaust survivor are among the latest British victims of the coronavirus outbreak to be named.
Wendy Jacobs, the head of Roose primary school in Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria, is the first identified key worker to have died from the disease.
The death has also been reported of William Stern, a Hungarian-born survivor of the Bergen-Belsen Nazi concentration camp, who was at the centre of one Britain's biggest bankruptcy cases.
Jacobs had been diagnosed with the virus last week and was being cared for in Furness general hospital. She died on Sunday, according to a letter sent to parents and carers from the school's chair of governors, Fred Chatfield. He said her death was "devastating" for the school and the community.
He also announced that the school would be closed to all pupils on Monday. Pupils left flowers and homemade cards at the school gates. Chatfield's letter said: "We are all in shock, and given these exceptional circumstances we have taken the decision to close the school and nursery fully tomorrow to all pupils, including those of essential workers.
"I am sure you will understand that opening the school and nursery is not an option. We would recommend that all children are kept at home tomorrow. This is a huge loss to our school, nursery and our community and I will be in touch as soon as possible to explain how we will celebrate Mrs Jacobs' life and contribution."
The school teaches child from nursery age to 11.
The Board of Deputies of British Jews said two members of the UK's ultra-Orthodox Haredi community had died, reported by media outlets to be Rina Feldman, 97, and Stern, who was 85.
Stern, who was born Vilmos György Stern in Budapest, Hungary, on 2 July 1935, was imprisoned as a child in the Bergen-Belsen camp during the second world war. He shared his memories of Torah readings in the camp on the Shoah website.
After the war he settled in London and went on to build a successful property empire. Stern Holdings collapsed in 1973 and in 1978 Stern was declared bankrupt with debts of £118m, a British record at the time.
The actor Sophia Myles, who has appeared in Spooks and Doctor Who, announced that her 77-year-old father, Peter Myles, had died of coronavirus on Saturday. Writing on Twitter she said: "My dear Dad died only a few hours ago. It was the coronavirus that finally took him."
She posted an image of her comforting her father the day before he died. Myles was shown touching his brow while wearing plastic gloves, a mask and a protective hospital apron.
Before he retired in 2008, Myles was an Anglican vicar at St John's church Isleworth, west London, where he was described as a "liberal soul". After being ordained in 1971 his first job as curate was in Tideswell in Derby. He spent the rest of his career in west London, including stints as a priest at Notting Hill's St Peter's church and as chaplain to the Bishop of Kensington.
He had Parkinson's disease, and spent his final years in a care home close to St John's in Isleworth. Myles had been documenting her father's illness for the US TV network CBS.
The former England rugby player Will Greenwood announced that his aunt Jean had died after testing positive for the virus.
In an Instagram post, Greenwood said his aunt "never did anything but bring sunshine into my life". He said she lived near Greenwood's boarding school in Sedbergh, Cumbria.
Greenwood said she was the eldest of three sisters and was in her 80s "but had so much living to do".