Pressure grows on Boris Johnson to impose UK coronavirus lockdown
Labour calls for enforced social distancing and a number of Tories back stricter approach
Boris Johnson is under mounting pressure to impose a tougher lockdown to fight coronavirus, as Labour called for enforced social distancing measures and some Conservatives broke ranks to back a stricter approach.
As parliament returned on Monday, the prime minister faced calls to take stronger action after pictures emerged of people flouting government advice to stay two metres apart whether inside or outside.
Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said the opposition had tried to be supportive but "something has to change" after public confusion, non-compliance with advice and grave scientific warnings about the consequences.
"Other countries have taken further far-reaching social distancing measures. We now call on the government to move to enforced social distancing and greater social protection as a matter of urgency," he said.
Keir Starmer, the Labour leadership frontrunner, also demanded more action, and an explanation from the government if it continues to refuse to go down this path.
"In these extraordinary times, the government must now set out further compliance measures, such as those introduced in other countries," he said. "These are vital days in the battle against the coronavirus."
Italy, Spain and France have stopped people from leaving their homes without good reason, with enforcement by police, and Germany has banned gatherings of more than two people unless they are related to fighting the virus.
Julian Smith, the former cabinet minister and ex-chief whip, was among the Tories backing tougher action. He said: "Many people have recklessly ignored government advice this weekend. I will support any measure the government needs to force people to follow the guidelines designed to protect NHS staff and UK citizens' lives."
The prime minister warned on Sunday that a curfew or lockdown enforced by the police may be necessary in the coming days but he has so far only urged people to stay inside where possible voluntarily.
Matt Hancock, the health secretary, was more critical of those who are not obeying the rules, branding those still socialising "very selfish" for putting the lives of NHS workers and other citizens at risk.
Johnson's official spokesman rejected claims the prime minister was facing a cabinet mutiny over his decision not to enforce a lockdown.
He said further measures may be brought in if data being gathered by the government shows that social distancing advice is still being ignored.
"If our analysis is that people haven't stopped their interactions then we will take further measures," the spokesman said.