Criticism over crowded London Underground trains
Reduced service leads to packed trains carrying NHS staff and other key workers in the capital
Transport for London (TfL) has faced criticism after social media users in London published photographs of packed tube trains on the Monday morning commute, at a time when the government is urging the public to practise social and physical distancing.
A TfL statement urged Londoners "not to travel unless their journey is absolutely essential".
However, with thousands of NHS and other key workers throughout the capital still needing to travel to work, as well as many businesses being advised to close but not forced to, a reduced schedule on the network led to people being forced close together.
In an attempt to reduce the number of people travelling on the London network, TfL last week announced that up to 40 stations would be closing temporarily – chiefly those that did not have interchanges between lines.
The frequency of services has also been reduced, with lines running 15 trains an hour at peak times, equating to a train roughly every four minute on routes through central London. Outside of peak hours, services are even further reduced. The Waterloo and City line has been closed and weekend "night tube" services have been suspended until further notice.
Several commenters on social media described the situation as "dangerous", highlighting that key workers are being exposed to the increased coronavirus transmission risk because of the overcrowding.
Labour MP for Bermondsey &amp; Old Southwark Neil Coyne tweeted a photo of a crowded train sent to him by a constituent, who was complaining that even as someone who wasn't a key worker, his employer was forcing them to continue to work, adding to the volume of people on the network.
Tfl says the service has been reduced with the intention that it would deter people from travelling, unless they were key workers. They also anticipate that their own drivers, station and control staff may begin to become ill, or be placed in a position where they need to stay at home in self-isolation or to care for someone with the coronavirus. The reduced levels of services give them more flexibility in redeploying staff if they have fewer people working.
A spokesperson for the mayor of London said: "Londoners should not be travelling by any mode of transport unless it is absolutely necessary, and only critical workers should be using public transport. The number of journeys on the tube is down significantly compared to the same time last year, with an 87% reduction this weekend.
"But we need Londoners to stop travelling. TfL will continue to do everything it can to provide a safe service but like many organisations it is dealing with rising absence levels and needs Londoners' cooperation in these challenging times."
Reduced services packing commuters into tight spaces was happening not just within London but also on trains carrying workers into the capital. The c2c franchise, which runs trains from Essex into Fenchurch Street, Liverpool Street and Stratford was also extremely crowded during peak hours.
While it is too early for TfL to collate usage figures, it says there was a 70% fall in the number of passengers on the tube by the end of last week, and a 40% reduction in passengers on the buses.