Wage pledge is no good for the gig economy
The government's plan to cover wages will help those in mainstream employment, but will do little for those in less stable work, writes Andrew Hillier. Plus letters from Pat Staples, Annabel Burton and Adrian Bradbury
The government's plan "to pay the wages of millions of workers across Britain to keep them in jobs" (UK government to pay 80% of wages for those not working in coronavirus crisis, 20 March) sounds good but, while it may help those in mainstream employment, it fails to address the problem of those engaged in the gig economy and less stable work.
First, vast numbers have already been dismissed, a process that will escalate exponentially over the next few days, leaving them without any rights or protection. Second, it is unclear how those who are retained and are on zero-hours contracts will have their pay computed. Third, and most crucially, there is the difficulty of enforcing any of these rights. Advice agencies in London are reporting that many employers are refusing to pay statutory sick pay, statutory maternity pay and wages already earned, confident that the enforcement agencies and employment tribunals are already unable to cope with the workload.
There is a serious risk that, under the new plan, employers will fail to transmit some or all of the payments due to their staff, many will go out of business long before enforcement action can be taken against them, and the voluntary advice sector will be overwhelmed by those seeking help, vast numbers of whom speak little or no English and have no idea of their rights. To be effective, therefore, these payments must be made directly by the state to all workers, including all those engaged in the gig economy, they should be backdated to 1 March and calculated by reference to that worker's pay during the 12 weeks prior to that date, and there should be a fast-track online enforcement process in cases where there is a dispute as to what is due.Andrew Hillier QCVolunteer case worker, South West London Law Centres
The government will only pay 80% of staff salaries if they are not working at all. The unfamiliar term of "on furlough" was used. This is supposed to mean that staff are not out of a job and can come back when things improve.
But if a small business has little or no income coming in, so it cannot pay its staff – bearing in mind there are other costs to be covered, like insurances, vehicle hire and rent – how is it meant to keep the business ticking over, by offering takeaways instead of sit-down meals, for example, or dropping off items to their customers, if all its staff have to be at home on furlough? Any staff remaining at work, even on very reduced hours, will not be paid at all by the government.
My own small business, like many, had been planning to work a rota system with reduced hours for staff at work. This will not now be possible. The business is supposed to operate at a low level so it is there to come back to, but with no staff working at all, this is an impossibility.Pat StaplesBishop's Waltham, Hampshire
If the chancellor is struggling to find ways to help out the self-employed, here is a suggestion. Since HMRC have the information regarding earnings on the last year's tax return, it would not be beyond its remit to reimburse 80% of three to six months' earnings after tax to the self-employed to help them over this difficult time. Then they would not have to claim universal credit. Annabel BurtonActon Bridge, Cheshire
I'm an identical twin. My brother is a salaried clarinettist; I am a freelance cellist. The government knows both of our incomes through HMRC, but is choosing to pay 80% of his and 5% of mine. Why the difference?Adrian BradburyLondon
Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com
Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Do you have a photo you'd like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we'll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition
