It's Mother's Day, Actually – but not like any other
People find ways around social distancing, such as one woman's message from end of driveway
It was a Mother's Day unlike any other as Britons were advised not to visit their loved ones on Sunday. But some people came up with innovative ways around social distancing.
While some left cards and presents at the doorstep and others used FaceTime to catch up with their families, Pamela Foulis, 56, went a step further. Foulis, a hairdresser from Dunfermline, recreated a scene from her favourite film, Love Actually, as she surprised her 83-year-old mother in Edinburgh on Sunday.
To the tune of Wet Wet Wet's Love Is All Around, Foulis spelled out a moving message to her mother, Helen Murphy, by holding up a series of cards at the end of her driveway.
"We all wish we could give you a hug and a kiss … But due to the virus, we will just give that a miss," the message read. "Sorry we aren't out eating, drinking and having fun … but hopefully by next year this will all be over and done."
A video taken by Foulis's daughter Lily had been viewed thousands of times within a couple of hours of being posted on Sunday afternoon.
Foulis said she had wanted to do something special for her parents who are self-isolating and worried about the coronavirus.
She said of her mother: "She was very emotional. I usually see her every week but obviously I've not seen her for about a fortnight now [because of the virus]. She wasn't expecting us at all.
"I was trying not to cry because I knew it was being videoed and I thought if I start I'll set my mum off. She was getting emotional anyway. I was biting my cheeks.
"I just feel for my mum and dad. They're getting older now and with all this stuff that's going on – my mum's really worried about everything anyway, so I just thought it would cheer her up a little bit. I don't know if it did or whether it made her worse."
Foulis said she had been told on Saturday that the barbers where she works was closing due to the virus, and when she spoke to the Guardian she was on her way to submit her CV to supermarkets for a part-time job.
As the UK faced its first weekend behind closed doors, many turned to video-calling apps such as FaceTime, Houseparty and Zoom to mark Mother's Day or to share a Saturday night in.
The celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay shared a video message to his mother as part of ITV's Britain Get Talking mental health campaign, which has relaunched in response to the outbreak.
He said: "I know it has been a dramatic week for everyone in the country but social distance, yes, is important, but even more important is social communication – talking.
"I promise you we are going to get through this and come out the other side even stronger. Please don't overcook that beef. I love you. Take care."