Cocooned with cushions: BBC hosts improvise home studios in Covid-19 era
As pandemic continues, presenters are self-isolating with DIY broadcasting kits
Although the BBC Radio 4 continuity announcer still said that this weekend's Any Questions? would come "from Broadcasting House", rather than the originally advertised school in Dagenham, it was actually broadcast from the front room of presenter Chris Mason's house in Charlton, south-east London.
Mason had self-isolated, with a DIY broadcasting kit, because of "some symptoms in my family". One of his guests was in Oxford, another in Belfast, and two more sat on either side of a wide table in a central London studio.
A panel discussion show, usually broadcast before a live audience, coming from four different locations, with questioners selected by email posing their challenges on the phone, was emblematic of the changes caused to broadcasting by a virus that has imposed restrictions on closeness.
Co-hosting, counterintuitively, has gone solo. Radio 4's Saturday Live was presented by the Rev Richard Coles in his rectory, and Aasmah Mir in her house.
Future historians trying to capture the texture of the Covid-19 crisis in the UK should record the eery transformation in the way that TV and radio look and sound.
On Radio 4 on Sunday morning, Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury presided over a service, alone in his chapel with no congregation. The only other time I've heard a holder of that post speaking with such a cold stone echo was Thomas Becket's soliloquies in a production of TS Eliot's Murder in the Cathedral performed in a church. In another sonic oddity, the archbishop's prayers were intercut with hymns recorded at a separate location by a choir of only four, standing the recommended NHS distance apart.
Musical purists will have felt the effect on the harmonising. But it's inevitably on television that social distancing has made most impact.
Ant &amp; Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway on ITV had its audience taken away, with the Geordie duo performing live at to acres of empty red seating in an auditorium empty except for a technical crew, reduced below usual numbers and widely spaced. Less successful performers become immured to delivering gags to no reaction, but, McPartlin and Donnelly were visibly and audibly thrown by the experience.
And, whereas male-female TV hosting duos have traditionally sat wedding-photo-close on their sofas, Rachel Burden and Ben Thompson, on Sunday's BBC Breakfast, had enough space between them for a panoramic view of much of Salford.
Later in the day, Nicky Campbell, hosting the BBC One ethical discussion show The Big Questions, lacked the usual studio audience, and his expert guests sat as far apart as if the topic for debate was extreme body odour.
"There will be a change of guests halfway through," advised Campbell, "in order to maintain safe distances between our speakers."
TV also suffers an audible effect from the isolation rules, as, with few contributors allowed into studios, most guests speak with the Dalek undertone of Skype.
The new arrangements bring some advantages. Both Any Questions? and its TV equivalent Question Time are improved as panellists are no longer tempted to end with soundbite punchlines designed to trigger audience applause.
But there are also drawbacks. Struggling with the technical difficulties of chairing without being able to see the guests, Mason asked plaintively at one point: "Er, is that Bim?"
The crisis is also tough on cultural shows relying on showbiz listings for material. Loose Ends on Radio 4 included an interview with a dramatist about a play that had just ended because of the closure of the theatres, and a chat with a performer about a show that "was supposed to be touring the UK at the moment". While most shows can go ahead if the participants can find an empty room at home, arts programmes also have the problem of what the guests will talk about.
And, as domestic presenting becomes more common, hosts will soon need to drop the joke about the risks of ambush by family life. Mason noted that he was "surrounded by Duplo", BBC 5 live's Mark "Chappers" Chapman attributed his failure to answer a question to being "outside telling the kids not to come in". Before home-hosting Any Answers? on Radio 4, Anita Anand tweeted "… kids will be sat upon upstairs I'm hoping".
Intriguingly, Anand also revealed that she had set up a home studio "with every pillow and cushion in the house for soundproofing". These soft furnishings worked so efficiently as an impromptu version of the acoustic diffusers that hang like upside-down mushrooms from concert hall ceilings that she might have been speaking from a studio. Mason, in contrast, sometimes sounded as if he was trapped in an under-stairs cupboard and shouting to be let out. Before the next Any Questions? he should raid the airing cupboards and sofas to create a softening cocoon around himself.
As some presenters have rightly acknowledged on air, radio broadcasters can only work from home if others (typically at the moment, one producer and one technician two metres apart) still go into the office to juggle an unusually complex mix of sound sources.
Such production staff are taking a double hit. The mission of BBC radio studio managers has always been to produce as pure and consistent sound as possible. The terse three-letter judgment NBQ (not broadcast quality) is the dread of producers. There is an understanding that the majority of contributions to should be "in quality" (from a studio or broadcast-quality phone line) rather than on mobiles or Skype.
I visualise the BBC's audio perfectionists sitting in the production cubicle with their thumbs in their ears and palms spread across blushing faces. For the duration of the emergency, they are going to have to accept a lot of NBQ.