'We give the kids elbow bumps': a headteacher's coronavirus diary
One primary school head, Tony Davies, records a week of uncertainty, and then closure
A member of staff calls me. She has been diagnosed with the virus at Addenbrooke's hospital, but they haven't tested her and aren't planning to. I spend the afternoon calling the Department for Education helpline and my local health protection team to find out if I should close the school. They say carry on as normal, because you haven't got a confirmed case.
I'm sitting there thinking: this is ridiculous. I know I haven't got a confirmed case, but that's because they're not testing. I send out an email to parents explaining the situation.
Messages start coming through from other staff saying they've got coughs and other signs of coronavirus too – and staff in high-risk groups are isolating. In total, 14 staff are unable to come to work. We try to pull in supply teachers, but it's hard to find any.
I email parents again to say that we're not sure whether we're going to be able to open the next day but we are going to do our best.
Senior leaders work until 11pm, putting together a plan of how we can keep the school open. Each time we think we have one, another staff member calls in sick.
I wake up wondering how many members of staff I will lose that day. But the staff response is amazing. Part-time staff, who weren't due to come in, offer to work. Parent volunteers and parents who are part-time teachers at other schools say they will help too. It is moving to receive so much support. But by the end of the day, we are 23 staff members down, including some of the key staff who were organising how we would stay open. I work until midnight. I am in practical mode, but I feel worried. How many days are we going to be able to keep going like this? The situation is untenable.
In case the school needs to close, we decide to roll out a new online learning platform so teachers can set activities for pupils at home. We have a staff meeting, and deliver five days' worth of training in about 40 minutes. But lots of children are not in school, so we cannot give them their log-ins.
We send out another message to parents and carers warning them to start planning emergency childcare arrangements.
Since the government is still saying schools will not close, we spend hours coming up with a plan of how we can stay open, with staff numbers dropping each day. In some year groups, only one teacher is left to cover three classes, with supply teachers and high-level teaching assistants trying to help. One teacher who is in that situation is newly qualified and in her first year of teaching. She works her socks off, like everyone else in the school.
At 5pm, Boris Johnson announces schools will close on Friday, except for vulnerable children and those whose parents are key workers. I feel relief, but wonder why I, a headteacher, am learning this from a press conference. I think that was extremely disrespectful. Schools should have been informed earlier so we could start working on what to do.
We end the day 30 staff members down.
The next morning the government still hasn't told us what the definition of a key worker is. So we are left with two days to try to put some childcare provision together for Monday, and we have no idea how many children are going to be in school and who will be eligible. This is terrible for us, and terrible for the parents who are key workers. They are all asking me: am I meant to be making arrangements or not? The uncertainty is awful.
At lunchtime, we come down to the staffroom and find that our PTA has put on the table this lovely selection of food, bottles of wine and even emergency toilet rolls that staff could just help themselves to. It is a beautiful moment. Staff start crying. We are aware that it may be the last day at our school for all the children in year 6. That hits us hard. All the lovely things we normally do for the children leaving – the end-of-year play, the leavers' assembly, the residential trip. We can't see any of them happening now.
So we give the kids elbow bumps in the playground at the end of the day and say goodbye. It is really emotional. Teachers form a real bond with the children in their class, and vice versa. To have that snipped off in such a brutal fashion is tough. We have a staff meeting to talk everything through at the end of the day, and teachers break down in tears.
We decide we will provide as much outdoor learning as we can next week, and disperse the children who do come in throughout the school. I am conscious that key workers in the NHS are the people most likely to be coming into contact with coronavirus cases, and that their children are probably most likely to get infected as a result. At school, these children will all come together, and potentially infect other kids who will return home to the families of the other workers we are most dependent on.
Given the way the government has been behind the curve, very reactive and flip-flopping, I haven't got a huge amount of faith this has been well thought through. But all schools can do is make sure the children aren't crammed up against each other where possible.
When I reflect on the last week, what gives me hope is how often I've seen people being supportive, kind and understanding. We're in uncharted waters but I know I've got the most amazing team of people around me – everyone from our office staff, teaching assistants and teachers to our parents and kids. The strength of our community has been really uplifting and heartwarming. We were already a really close knit community school, but this has brought us that much closer together.
When we get our school back, when we get our lives back, we will know what's most important to us, and I hope we will treasure and value it. Because that will be an amazing foundation for the future.
