Police vow to enforce virus pub ban as some in UK continue to gather
Scotland says it will enforce law; Northern Ireland deals with end-of-school parties; Wales boosts NHS measures
Scottish police will enforce the coronavirus-related ban on pubs, clubs and restaurants opening if necessary, the chief constable has said.
Iain Livingstone said in a statement: "To be clear, no public houses or other entertainment venues should be opening for patrons until further notice."
He thanked "the overwhelming majority" of people complying with the ban and said police were monitoring proposed legislation to counter the spread of Covid-19 and its potential implications for policing.
"In the meantime, those breaking the law will be dealt with appropriately to ensure the public is kept safe from risk and harm as we continue to police the country," he said on Saturday.
Bars, cafes restaurants, cinemas and theatres have all closed in the wake of the latest official health warnings and government advice. Scotland's first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said on Friday that Scots must not treat the call to stay away from such venues as optional, insisting the measure was "vital to help us save lives".
The Police Service of Northern Ireland said they were still receiving reports of anti-social behaviour and end-of-school parties despite the new restrictions.
"Please … consider the health of others and adhere to the social distance practices outlined by the health department," the service said on Saturday.
Nine new cases of Covid-19 were revealed on Friday in the country, taking the total to 86.
In Wales, the government announced a series of initiatives aimed at tackling the coronavirus crisis, including calling retired doctors and nurses back to work and increasing testing. A further two people have died in the country after contracting coronavirus, bringing the total number of deaths there to five, health officials have said. More than 280 people have tested positive for the virus.
Vaughan Gething, the minister for health and social services, said pharmacies could restrict their opening hours to protect staff.
He also reassured health and social care workers there would be enough personal protective equipment (PPE) available for those who needed it.
Gething, who was self-isolating because his son had developed a cough, revealed plans to increase testing for coronavirus in Wales, with the capacity to complete 9,000 a day by the end of April.
Gething said Wales was implementing the ban on cafes, pubs, bars, restaurants, gyms and theatres opening "because we need to reduce the number of places where people can gather in numbers and to reduce the opportunities for the virus to spread".
"That is not an easy decision to make and the impacts on people's lives and livelihoods are enormous. Our priority is to protect people's health and ultimately to save lives."
Under the scheme to increase staffing in the NHS and social care sector in Wales to cope with the extra coronavirus cases, final-year students will be offered work, and more than 5,000 letters have been sent to retired professionals. Those who have left or retired in the last three years will be urged to re-register with their relevant professional bodies and asked what role they could play and how much time they can dedicate.
The chief nursing officer, Jean White, said: "I am appealing to all health professionals who are able to help at this time to make themselves available. Our National Health Service needs you, Wales needs you."
Gething said he was aware of the concerns about the availability and quality of PPE required.
"If neither the care worker nor the individual receiving care and support is symptomatic, then no PPE is required above and beyond normal good hygiene practices," he said.
Public Health Wales can currently carry out 800 coronavirus tests a day. This will increase to 6,000 a day from 1 April, 8,000by 7 April, and 9,000 by the end of the month.
Gething said social distancing and social distancing were "absolutely fundamental" to delaying the spread of the virus.
"We all need to follow this advice now to protect each other and our families and to help ensure our NHS is not overwhelmed with cases."
This article was amended on 21 March 2020 to correct a reference to Wales as a principality; it is a country.