Writing a live blog: 'You're frantically keeping the plates spinning'
What's it like being in charge of a minute-by-minute update on a global pandemic that 7 million people are following?
It started out as a bit of an experiment in 2007, an attempt to take what sports journalists were doing with minute-by-minute coverage of cricket and football and see if it would work with fast-paced news events.
It did. More than a dozen years later, the Guardian's live blog format (a rolling screed of real-time news updates written by journalists like me) is one of our most successful digital innovations ever, prodigiously utilised, much copied – and so well read that it can be daunting for those doing the writing.
Take the coronavirus story. As the news about the pandemic becomes grimmer and the measures to combat it ever more drastic, the interest from readers has only grown. At the start of March the coronavirus live blog was already attracting 3 million page views each day. By this week, daily figures for the blog were more than 7 million.
As one of a pool of reporters called upon to liveblog coronavirus, these are intimidating figures. It isn't easy imagining all those eyeballs glaring at typos in your latest post, while you struggle to keep on top of a rapidly moving story that has hit all parts of the world.
Indeed, there are moments when you might wonder about the impact of this kind of journalism, with its rapid-fire, alert-style updates and overwhelming tide of information. A very few readers have told us they find it all too much in an anxious world. We try to mitigate by bringing in breadth and context wherever possible.
Fortunately, help is at hand from reporters all over the world, colleagues in the office and, crucially, readers. All of us who do the coronavirus live blog have been sent a stream of emails, tweets and texts from readers with helpful tips, insights, corrections, and encouragement. These are particularly useful from areas of the world where we don't have correspondents.
A Guardian subscriber from Greenland got in touch this week to tell us about the island's first confirmed case. Anders Madsen, a nurse from the capital, Nuuk, became the live blog's Greenland coronavirus correspondent, with a post about concerns over delays in verifying cases because tests have to be confirmed in Denmark. This prompted another reader from the Falklands to report similar concerns about tests having to go to the UK for confirmation.
Doctors have also been in touch to share their expertise and concerns. And generally readers have let us know how they and their relatives are coping. One shared a video of her mother singing about all the things she's been doing while locked down in her flat in Spain. Putting lighter content like this on the blog isn't always appropriate, and risks trivialising an incredibly serious crisis. But when it feels right to do so, it can help break up what would otherwise be a fairly unremitting string of updates.
Though principally used to convey the latest on the breaking stories of the day, live blogs are not always bleak. We liveblogged the solar eclipse in 2015, numerous other astronomical events, royal weddings, Nobel prizes, and any number of Oscars ceremonies. Once we liveblogged an entire Friday night on the town with British carousers to see what kind of pressures they put on the NHS.
Among the first that I did were on the floods in the UK in 2007. It was an era before Twitter and we were using a blogging platform that would crash almost every time you tried to embed a video.
Minute-by-minute reports, as they were known then, were initially frowned on by some senior figures in the Guardian. They were regarded as good for football but not for serious news stories – the first draft of the first draft of history, if you like. However, the popularity of the format soon changed minds. And when the website and print reporters integrated into one team, live blogs became central to the way the site covered major breaking stories. Greatly improved liveblogging software and increased involvement of correspondents from around the world made the Guardian live blogs more respected and even better read.
The torrent of major developments on coronavirus makes the story virtually impossible to cover through conventional news stories. By the time such stories are written, edited and published, they are often already out of date. Only by following events in real time can you satisfy readers' desire for up-to-date news about Covid-19.
But the virus is testing even this flexible format. On some days the website has carried up to five live blogs on the subject as it hits business, UK, US and Australian politics, and global affairs.
There is so much to cover, it can be very tricky to convey the key developments. As a live blogger, you are frantically trying to keep several important plates spinning all at once – with the latest from China, Italy, Iran, and the UK, plus the effect on sport, the arts, and the economy, and all those briefings from the World Health Organization. Taking a step back to summarise what's been going on risks at least some of these plates crashing down. Colleagues often have to help out while you put together a summary.
And it threatens to become even more difficult to cover as more of us are forced to work from home. Live blogging is much easier in a busy open-plan office, with several TVs broadcasting various news channels. Colleagues will shout out to make sure you're aware of the latest developments, such as an announcement from the NHS. And editors will even come to your desk to tell you, "Idris Elba's got it!" or point out Donald Trump's latest virus tweet.
Liveblogging coronavirus from the kitchen table will be a different affair altogether. But this format has reinvented itself in the past. Perhaps it can do so again.