We will emerge from the coronavirus crisis stronger and more efficient
An NHS consultant braces for the onslaught but as Covid-19 cases grow colleagues are finding ways to reinforce their hospitals and care
This week I have found myself mainly focused on our workers, not our patients.
It is not that we don't have plenty of patients. There remains a steadily growing urgency, day to day. Our plans for designated wards for the disease have crept up from one, to two, to three and soon we anticipate taking over an entire hospital floor. That said, we have noticed a reduction in the usual non-coronavirus cases attending hospital; people are clearly staying away unless they have to.
So far we are managing. I do wonder for how long though, as I watch the steepening curve of cumulative cases.
The challenge has been to come up with ways to staff these wards, examining how, in a few days, we can completely rewrite doctors' rotas that have remained unchanged for years. We can no longer afford the luxury of the weekend go-slow; we will very soon need seven-day junior and senior cover on all wards.
This is only in part driven by the need to care for the sickest; we will have to discharge our stable patients home just as fast as we can admit them if we are to have any chance of staying afloat.
Specialists who only see outpatients are being summoned back into ward work they may not have done for decades. Doctors doing research or other non-clinical work are being called to the coalface. We will all have to work many more weekends and - probably soon - cancel our leave. Our clinical psychologists offer their support to staff who probably need it more than their patients.
The workforce faces other challenges, too. On Monday came the announcement that we must all isolate for at least 14 days if any household contacts were ill, counter to the previous advice that we could work when we remained well. At a stroke we lost six consultants in my division alone because their children were coughing.
We are scrabbling to set up home working but with our clunky systems and even clunkier IT department this is proving a painful process; in any case we need people on the wards, not remotely signing off their clinic letters. These constant changes threaten to undermine our initiatives before they begin.
Alongside this we have groups of staff unable to work. Many are pregnant and again we have no consistent position on exactly what is safe for them to do. Others have underlying health problems of their own. To be on the safe side we decided early on that they should avoid seeing infected patients. However, as it became clear that there were sporadic cases cropping up all over the hospital, we have now pulled them from the wards altogether.
So, how do we efficiently use a second- or third-year junior doctor, whose only training so far has been in the hands-on care of inpatients, when they can't safely work in that environment? We are still grappling with this. And the guilt people feel from being unable to support their colleagues on the front line is palpable.
There are some positives to report. Our respiratory medicine expertise (such as it can be in a disease that has only existed for a few months) has thus far been in short supply. Soon, however, we will have agreed consensus guidance for how to manage the disease to help doctors not trained in respiratory or infectious diseases.
While this is based on scant evidence – our expert of the moment is whoever happens to have seen a couple more cases than anyone else – at least this will bring some consistency to our practice and reduce the pressure on us to give advice.
Meanwhile, our management structure within the hospital gets stronger by the day as we learn together and become more responsive to these changing demands.
And we are finally learning how to handle our communications, which have been patchy as we struggled with such a fast-moving situation. There is no doubt in my mind that we will emerge from this a stronger and more efficient organisation.
Until then we will carry on walking over these shifting sands and trying our best not to sink.
The writer is an NHS respiratory consultant who works across a number of hospitals