'We feel compelled': the doctors planning to return to NHS frontline
Doctors not currently practising respond to government 'your NHS needs you' plea
Doctors not currently practising have told the Guardian how they plan to return to the NHS frontline, in response to the government plea reminiscent of wartime Britain in which they were told: "Your NHS needs you."
They described the crisis as a generation-defining moment and said they were keen to help, after seeing medical staff in Italy working in conditions "akin to a war zone".
Earlier, Matt Hancock, the health secretary, called for doctors and nurses who have recently left the health service to return as part of the national effort to fight coronavirus.
Dr Mohammed Jawad, a public health researcher at Imperial College London, said he plans to return to the NHS frontline and knows "dozens and dozens" of others who plan to do the same.
Jawad, a specialist in infectious diseases who is also part of a team advising GPs, hospitals and schools about Covid-19 for Public Health England, said: "Some of my colleagues have made a firm decision to return. We feel compelled to do our bit for the NHS."
"A lot of us have come straight out of medical school into public health, so it is not that long since we saw our last patient. Everyone I've spoken to is at least thinking about returning and is not ruling it out. I've spoken to dozens and dozens of people. What we are really worried about is there being enough doctors to deal with the surge of people needing hospital treatment."
Jawad's wife, also in public health, plans to go back too, he said. The pair, who have a baby daughter, would need to retrain. "We are both in a similar position, both public health doctors. For us, it would need a complete rethink on how we do things. We would need to call in favours and would need help with childcare, errands and transport."
Jawad, who worked as a doctor for two years and last saw a patient five years ago, said he would likely take up a support role, to free up more experienced staff.
"Ordinarily, it would take six weeks to retrain, but I expect that would be expedited. I would be happy to free up NHS doctors skilled in advanced clinical procedure, in intensive care, to help with the important but more menial tasks, including ward rounds and paperwork."
Jawad said it was "ingrained" in a doctors genetic make up to respond to calls of altriusm and he expected many retired doctors to heed Hancock's call. He said one of the biggest worries was becoming infected and bringing the infection home.
"I would really like to see testing of health workers implemented as soon as possible."
The General Medical Council is writing to 15,500 doctors who have retired since 2017 and the Nursing and Midwifery Council is asking 50,000 nurses whose registration has lapsed in the last three years.
Another researcher, who did not want to be named because he was in discussions with his employers over swapping roles, said he made a decision after seeing the conditions of Italian hospitals, and urged people in Britain to heed the government's advice to stay home.
"Looking at Italy, it looks like the working conditions are akin to a war zone," the researcher said. "People are still going to the pub here, but it is not any less likely to be as bad here."
He said he would also need retraining. "I could not just walk into a Covid-19 ward. I would need a structured, supervised return. If someone had worked as a respiratory consultant for 40 years, they could do that, but I would do ward round, cannulas, talking to relatives, writing prescriptions, whatever we could do to help.
"It is such an unprecedented and surreal situation for many people to grasp the gravity of it. But hospitals are going to be overrun and everyone has a duty to stop socialising. This will be a generation-defining moment. You want to say years down the line you did your bit."
Sixty-two-year-old GP, John, took early retirement for health reasons five years ago but has continued to work part time since. He said he would be happy to continue working during the coronavirus outbreak but thinks that Hancock's call to action may be problematic.
"He was giving the impression this morning that we would be given a couple of hours training then put on an ITU in charge of a ventilator," he said.
"That would probably be even more dangerous for the patient than for me. Most retired doctors are not intensivists or respiratory physicians and I think they would be much more likely to volunteer if they knew what jobs they were likely to be offered."