UK's organic vegetable delivery firms 'flat out' amid coronavirus crisis
Companies such as Abel &amp; Cole and Riverford struggling to cope with sharp rise in orders
Organic vegetable box delivery companies are facing unprecedented demand for their food as a result of the coronavirus outbreak, putting huge strains on their packing lines.
Abel &amp; Cole, which puts out 55,000 food boxes a week on average, has seen a more than 25% increase in orders, with its packing teams working at full capacity to cope.
Abel &amp; Cole on Friday told customers it was reducing its offer to its staple of vegetable boxes, rather than being able to offer its wider range. This was down to the ability of packers to get the boxes out, rather than any issue with supplies at this point in time.
'"We are doing our utmost to feed people and get our boxes to them," said a spokeswoman for the company. "Our team has been absolutely amazing. They are working flat out."
Riverford has reported similar increases as regular customers increase the amount of food they are buying and the regularity of their box deliveries. Pressure on its packing lines has meant the company has had to stop taking any new orders this week or accepting new customers.
Abel &amp; Cole has taken on more staff to cope, and Riverford has pulled staff off its marketing and administrative side to help pack.
Both companies are facing demand on the scale of its Christmas peak, but without having six months to prepare as they do before the festive season.
"This has been driven by those self-isolating for coronavirus or avoiding public shopping spaces to protect themselves by choosing home delivery, as well as the demand for healthy, organic food," said Rob Haward, Riverford's managing director.
Haward said there was no problem with its UK suppliers and it also imports from long-term growers in Spain and Italy, where there are no transportation problems.
Another food box delivery company, Oddbox, which operates in London and delivers food that would otherwise have gone to waste, has had to stop taking new orders as it faces "unprecedented levels of demand" as millions of people in London stay at home.
A milk delivery company that promises "eco-friendly" deliveries has also struggled to cope with unprecedented demand.
Milk &amp; More, which also delivers groceries, including bread and juice, said a 1,500% increase in new customers over the past week meant it had stopped accepting new customers. It is also limiting the number of some household essentials that a customer can order to two items.