UK bus firms call for £1bn aid to maintain vital services
Revenues down £50m a week as passenger numbers slump during coronavirus crisis
Britain's bus operators have called for the government to provide £1bn in urgent aid to maintain critical services, as passenger numbers fall away because of the coronavirus.
The numbers travelling have fallen by more than half outside London, with a loss of £50m a week in revenues, according to operators, and are expected to drop further with the closure of schools from Friday.
Older passengers with concessionary passes who make up a large proportion of bus users are also expected to heed advice to self-isolate.
The government had recently pledgedan extra £5bn over five years in recognition of the importance of bus services, which have dwindled during a decade of funding cuts. However, the coronavirus outbreak has led firms to demand immediate aid.
Graham Vidler, the chief executive of the Confederation of Passenger Transport, which represents bus companies, said: "Operators are under extreme pressure and facing impossible choices over which routes they have to cut and how many staff may have to go. We urgently need the government to help now to secure the future of the industry."
Firms collectively employ about 100,000 drivers and 120,000 support staff. More journeys are made by buses than trains, not least by key workers and the public to reach hospitals.
The confederation said companies were ready to help the national response to the crisis in different ways, possibly using buses as mobile grocery stores for people self-isolating, or as mobile virus testing units.
Meanwhile, train companies started to confirm which services would be pared back across Britain from Monday, with passengers urged to stop all non-essential travel.
About half the timetable will be cut after ministers and rail operators across England, Scotland and Wales agreed to ensure core services and freight could keep running.
Operators pledged to run enough trains for key workers and to allow the public to access medical appointments, as well as maintaining the flow of goods by rail. Franchised train operators have minimum service obligations and could have faced contractual penalties without government dispensation.
The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said: "We are taking decisive action to protect the public, which means reducing travel for the time being, whilst still ensuring key worker heroes can get to their jobs to keep this nation running."
Shapps suggested this week that more rail networks could be temporarily nationalised but the government would be "flexible" over contracts. Several franchises were in financial difficulty because of stalling passenger numbers even before the current crisis.
Almost 70% fewer rail journeys have been made since the outbreak started, according to the Department for Transport. As well as responding to reduced demand, train operators are preparing for mass absences of staff.
Operators will publish next week's schedules by Sunday lunchtime. Many, including Northern, have already been forced to cancel dozens of trains at short notice because of sickness and self-isolation. It expects to be running rail replacement buses as part of its revised timetable.
Among the first to announce emergency timetables on Friday were London and south-east commuter franchises.
South Western Railway will cut all services on some branches, last trains will depart earlier from London Waterloo, and major lines will have only half-hour or hourly services, particularly outside peak hours.
Southeastern said it would attempt to keep all stations open for now and stretch schedules over as much of the day as possible.
Govia Thameslink Railway said it would make a second batch of cuts in a week's time, and has already slashed trains to Gatwick airport.
Network Rail has said retailers in its stations will not have to pay rent for the first quarter.
In the capital, a reduced London Underground service has come into effect with the closure of 40 stations and the axing of the night tube.
National Express said it would be running only a limited number of its nationwide coach services from Tuesday.