Church of England restricts weddings to five people
Coronavirus crisis means baptisms will also have to be scaled back, says C of E
Wedding ceremonies should be restricted to five people because of the coronavirus crisis, the Church of England has said. The bride and groom will be permitted to stand close together, but others present should observe social distancing.
The legal minimum for wedding ceremonies is the person officiating, the couple, and two witnesses.
The numbers attending baptisms should also be limited to single figures, the church said.
Weddings and baptisms need to be "very significantly scaled back to meet the need for social distancing", according to the new guidance published on Thursday. It said it would help families who choose to rearrange ceremonies to a future date, or proceed now but hold a public blessing at a later date.
The move came as thousands of couples are being forced to postpone wedding ceremonies, with some facing huge bills if they have not taken out insurance. Wedding venues are facing cancellations for months ahead.
Buckingham Palace announced this week that Princess Beatrice, the Queen's granddaughter, was "reviewing" her wedding plans. She was due to marry Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi at the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace in London, on 29 May.
The couple's reception in the gardens of Buckingham Palace, hosted by the Queen, has already been cancelled. Mapelli Mozzi comes from the Lombardy region of Italy, where there have been almost 500 deaths from the virus.
A palace spokesperson said: "The couple will carefully consider government advice before deciding whether a private marriage may take place among a small group of family and friends."
However, the C of E's new advice puts even such a scaled-back ceremony in doubt. It says: "Where family relatives or friends are unable to attend given the restrictions on numbering, churches will be happy to explore ways to allow others to join the service, either through platforms such as Skype, or recording the service to send at a later date to anyone unable to attend.
"Where no audio link can be achieved, an order of service could be sent either by email or post. Apart from the bride and groom, the physical distance should be observed as far as possible.
"No additional church personnel will attend the service, for example organists, vergers or sound system operator etc."
Couples cancelling their church wedding would be refunded any fees or deposit in full.
Baptisms should be limited to the candidate, their parents, guardians or carers, plus the godparents and minister, the church said. The priest should not hold the child and the water should be administered with an appropriate implement such as a shell.
David Walker, the bishop of Manchester, said: "Couples and parents, friends and families will have been planning for months, even years for their special moment, whether a wedding or a christening.
"Now it can go ahead – but with only the minimum required in attendance. You may need to cancel or postpone.
"Whatever decision is made, God's love and blessing will still surround all those who would have been there that day."
The guidance on weddings and baptisms came a day after the C of E advised that funerals should be limited to immediate family, and livestreamed to others wishing to pay their respects, with those attending in person observing social distancing.
"Those over the age of 70 and those with an underlying health condition are strongly discouraged from attending in the present circumstances," the guidance said.
"While naturally those present may wish to shake hands or hug, all present should refrain from doing so in light of guidance on physical distancing."
There should be no wakes or other gatherings after the funeral, it added. "Consider whether a memorial service could be held at some point in the future," it suggests.
The C of E, the Catholic church, mosques, synagogues, and other faiths and religious institutions have all ceased routine services of worship.