Coronavirus latest: 19 March at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
More coronavirus-related deaths have been registered in Italy than in any other country, after the number of fatalities rose by 427 to 3,405 – versus 3,245 in China. The Mediterranean nation recorded 475 new deaths on Wednesday, the most reported by any country in a single day since the start of the outbreak.
The number of people who have died from Covid-19 in the UK has risen to 144 after 29 more deaths in England, three more in Scotland and the first death in Northern Ireland. The English patients were aged between 47 and 96 and all had underlying health conditions. Overall, around four in 10 of the coronavirus-related UK deaths were in London, which the government has stressed will not be strictly locked down.
Hundreds of thousands of Britons are seeking to return home amid exponential increases in demand for consular services, the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, said, with specific repatriation problems focused on Morocco, Peru and Vietnam. Meanwhile, France warned it may start turning away travellers from the UK if the country does not introduce a similar near-total lockdown as it, Italy and Spain have imposed.
The death toll has risen by 169 people to 767 over the past day. Among the latest victims was a 52-year-old nurse from the Basque country. The number of confirmed cases in Spain now stands at 17,174.
The US Food and Drugs Administration commissioner, Stephen Hahn, said several possible vaccine approaches were undergoing testing, including a drug long-used to treat malaria and an experimental antiviral, but he stressed it was important not to provide false hope.
The US entertainment industry union said about 120,000 film industry workers have lost their jobs in Hollywood – a large majority of its 150,000 members – following a near-total cessation of the global film and TV industry.
Narendra Modi, the Indian prime minister, said people should leave their homes only if essential and that everybody should observe a "janata curfew" from 7am to 9pm, following the deaths of at least four people from the virus nationwide.
A UN aid agency warned that Covid-19 will reach Syria's last opposition-held province, where 900,000 people are living in makeshift accommodation and overcrowded tents – meaning adequate hygiene and social distancing measures are impossible.
At a handover ceremony in Athens without any spectators, officials oversaw the playing of anthems and hoisting of flags, with addresses given by Japanese torchbearers via video link in the Panathenaic Stadium, site of the first modern Olympics in 1896.