'I'm very frightened': lives on hold as NHS surgery postponed due to Covid-19
Urgent cancer and gallbladder procedures called off, leaving many in pain and fear
Thousands of patients across the UK are having operations called off indefinitely as the government and NHS gear up for the peak of coronavirus infections.
For many this means prolonged pain and discomfort, fear and emotional turmoil, cancelled plans and loss of earnings. For some, it might be life-threatening.
Maggie Hollick, 67, from Shrewsbury, Shropshire, was due to have a cancer operation on 20 March. "I had a malignant melanoma removed five years ago, but unfortunately this has now metastasised and spread to my right lymph nodes," she said.
After she discovered a lump in October and had various tests, it was decided she should have the lymph nodes removed at the Queen Elizabeth hospital, in Birmingham, at the earliest opportunity.
But two days before the operation, Hollick was told her surgery had been called off, as all available resources were needed to cope with the coronavirus crisis.
"The lovely surgeon rang me and explained how sorry he was, but said that no operations at all, not even urgent ones, were able to go ahead in Birmingham. I asked him what would happen if this spread so far in my body that it became terminal in the meantime. He said he was unable to answer," she said. "I am very frightened."
Hollick has not been given a new date for her operation, but was told it could be weeks or even months away, and that she and one other patient would be the next ones to be dealt with.
"My family and I are so anxious about this, and I am desperately ringing around trying to find if I could have this operation done privately, which probably won't be an option.
"I feel I can't just be written off like that. I don't know where to turn. It's a desperate, dire situation," she said.
Hilery Williams, 68, a retired teacher from Edinburgh, was due to have much-needed hip replacement surgery on 24 March. She was transferred to the Golden Jubilee hospital, in Clydebank, because the waiting list there was shorter, and her doctors pressed for the earliest possible slot for her, as they considered her case a priority.
"The Jubilee is a hospital which does not do emergency surgery. The Scottish government tweeted on about 9 March that there were no plans to use the hospital for the coronavirus. But on Wednesday, the hospital phoned and cancelled my surgery until further notice," she said.
Williams is in a lot of pain and practically immobile.
"I'm a huge supporter of the NHS, and of course completely understand. But I am disappointed. Since the deaths of my parents and my son's suicide last year the pain in my hip has grown exponentially," she said.
Yet, she considers in a better position than many. "I am still very fortunate. I may not be able to walk any further than from the front door to the car, but I have a partner, I have some money, I will be OK."
Michael Ward, 38, a university lecturer from Cardiff, has been waiting for six months for an urgent gallbladder removal that had been scheduled to take place on 13 April. But on Friday, all NHS routine operations in Wales were cancelled.
"It's been a two-and-a-half year journey of pain, continuous burping and belching and stomach issues, and numerous tests," Ward said. He can no longer eat many foods and has lost about two and a half stone. "I did have a cry of relief when my appointment letter came through, it was wonderful," he said.
"I have been taking a lot of pain medication, went to A&amp;E with a panic attack last November. I got sent away with some Gaviscon, they were totally overwhelmed even then. Eventually, my gallbladder will stop working, and I don't know when that will be."
Since January, he has been able to go into the university only once a week. "My colleagues have been really supportive, and have made it possible for me to work from home four days a week since the beginning of this semester," he said. "My students are important to me, it's a very frustrating situation, and there's no end in sight."
Julie Courtis, 62, from Richmond-upon-Thames, has been caring for her 24-year-old daughter since July last year, when she suffered a complicated displacement fracture after a fall at a tube platform.
"She shattered her tibia and had five hours of surgery, two plates and 13 pins inserted. She was due to have an operation on Friday to repair the cartilage damage and remove the metalwork, and to address the constant pain she is in," Courtis said.
Two days ago, the operation was cancelled.
"My daughter was confined to her room for months, with her leg extended. At first her mobility was so limited she could not make it to the bathroom. It took three months to get her into a car. Her recovery came to a halt three months ago," Courtis said.
"She has been on very strong painkillers and has not been able to complete her dissertation for her master's degree," she added. "It could be a lot worse, of course, but you know. Her life is on hold."
