Where will we be after coronavirus? Politics Weekly podcast
Heather Stewart is joined by Miatta Fahnbulleh, Polly Mackenzie and Ryan Shorthouse to talk about the possible consequences of the UK government's response to Covid-19. Plus, Rajeev Syal talks to the former head of the civil service Lord Kerslake about how Whitehall deals with a national emergency
2019 seemed like a crazy year, but then 2020 came along.
Just weeks ago, Boris Johnson was basking in his new majority and setting out his plans to "level up" Britain. But he now knows he'll forever be the coronavirus prime minister.
On Monday, the government radically stepped up its approach to the virus, advising what the prime minister admitted were unprecedented peacetime measures.
On Tuesday night, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, laid out the latest in the government's action plan for helping UK businesses survive. This action plan doesn't come cheap. The chancellor announced £330bn in state-backed loans for businesses and individuals affected by the virus.
So, will the government be able to keep the UK economy afloat? How will it reassure the public who don't trust the science they're being presented with? Will Johnson's premiership be overshadowed by his response to a global pandemic, and how are voters likely to react either way?
To discuss the government's response to the spread of Covid-19 and what prospects await us on the other side, Heather Stewart is joined by Miatta Fahnbulleh, the chief executive of the New Economics Foundation, Polly Mackenzie, a former Lib Dem adviser who's currently at the thinktank Demos, and Ryan Shorthouse, the founder and chief executive of the thinktank Bright Blue.
The Guardian is editorially independent.
And we want to keep our journalism open and accessible to all.
But we increasingly need our readers to fund our work.
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.