I'm a PhD student and I'm worried by my university's coronavirus approach
My university is staying open for now, but I have no idea whether I'll be able to continue doing my research
On 11 March, the World Health Organisation declared coronavirus to be a pandemic. On 12 March, at the University of Bristol, where I conduct my research, news broke that a student had tested positive for coronavirus after returning home from abroad. Despite this, the university is still open. Although most courses have moved online, lots of students have remained on site and can still use campus facilities such as the gym. I'm finding the university's response unclear, confusing, and perhaps even irresponsible.
As a PhD student, my anxiety is growing as we wait for information about our academic status. The university previously announced that research had to continue and be supported. Yet cancelling lectures and assessments while keeping the university open and encouraging staff and research students to continue working seems counterintuitive.
While all undergraduate and postgraduate overseas fieldwork has been banned for the rest of the academic year, those of us doing fieldwork in the UK were instructed to continue researching as usual. The expectation that non-emergency research involving human participants should have carried on normally during the past few weeks is worrying.
My research focuses on young refugee and asylum-seeking students' experiences and perspectives of education in England. For my project, I need to collect data in schools. I'm uncomfortable going ahead with this. I'm worried about the wellbeing of students and teachers who must go to school and work during this chaotic time. Besides, the risk that there will be a period in which I am unable to collect data poses a severe challenge for a time-sensitive project.
Despite these ethical considerations, it's still unclear to me whether I will be punished for not doing fieldwork. I am concerned that even though it is not my fault, I may be penalised and not given additional time to finish my study.
As an international student I will be hit particularly hard by the pandemic, since I am separated from loved ones. On a practical level I am worried about visa issues as there is the chance that extension requests could be denied. I feel trapped by the uncertainty.
In my view, the university should have advised research students doing fieldwork in the UK to stop their research at least a week ago. It could have reassured us that we would be granted extensions of study to finish our research projects, and outlined the available support for postgraduate research students. It would be comforting to hear that there is no pressure on us to be productive at this time and that instead we should focus on our health and loved ones. Right now, while the university remains open, I feel the pressure to go to work even though the government has announced that we should stay home.
The University of Bristol's community is culturally diverse, with students and staff from more than 100 countries. The university should do more to ensure all local and international members of our community feel supported, valued and safe. We should expect some confusion during these uncertain times, and I understand it may be challenging to implement emergency policies. But it's time for universities to prioritise the wellbeing of their students, staff and local communities above all else.
Jafia Naftali Camara is a PhD student at the University of Bristol