Boris Johnson details raft of new coronavirus measures at PMQs
PM tells MPs of plans to help renters and boost sick pay and says decision on schools is imminent
Boris Johnson has detailed a raft of new measures to tackle coronavirus including help for renters and enhanced sick pay, and has said there will be an imminent decision on school closures.
He used prime minister's questions, which was attended by far fewer MPs than usual and who sat further apart from each other, to thank everyone who has worked in schools, but hinted that changes were to be expected soon.
Johnson said: "Of course we will do everything we can to remove burdens on schools and Ofsted is one in particular we can address. The house should expect further decisions to be taken imminently on schools and how to make sure we square the circle of making sure we stop the spread of the disease but also making sure we relieve, as much as we can, pressure on our NHS."
Johnson also suggested a number of significant changes would come into force to help the lowest paid after a series of questions from the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, the Commons leader of the Scottish National party, Ian Blackford, and other MPs.
A temporary universal basic income is among the measures being considered, it has emerged. After being asked twice about it, Johnson said: "Of course that is one of the ideas that will certainly be considered."
Asked by Corbyn if he would increase levels of sick pay beyond £94 a week because it was inadequate to feed a family, Johnson replied: "In addition to the package of business support that the chancellor outlined yesterday, we will be working with the unions, working with colleagues across the house. We will be bringing forward further measures to support workers of all kinds throughout this crisis."
For those on zero-hours contracts who do not get statutory sick pay, Johnson has said that issue is also being considered.
He said: "Of course we will ensure nobody is penalised for doing the right thing protecting themselves and other members of society. Since the state is after all making demands of the public and of business it is only right we should be doing whatever it takes to support the workers of this country throughout this crisis."
Corbyn also raised the concerns of renters worried about looming evictions if they no longer received a wage. There are currently 3m rented households in the UK with people who have children.
Johnson said he would bring forward legislation to protect private renters from eviction and would look into scrapping section 21 no-fault evictions.
Corbyn's spokesman said Labour expected that the government would move to close schools.
The Labour leader, 70, attended PMQs in person despite the guidance being that those in his age bracket should consider social distancing.
His spokesman said the advice from government for the over-70s had not been clear.