BBC suspends filming of EastEnders due to coronavirus
Casualty, Holby City and Doctors also affected as range of measures revealed
The BBC has suspended filming of EastEnders and refocused its efforts on providing coverage of the coronavirus outbreak with a promise to launch daily educational programmes if schools are closed.
As part of a range of measures, the BBC said it would start to use its local radio stations as hubs to coordinate volunteer help for the elderly, refocus its food website around recipes that can be cooked with limited ingredients, and add additional box sets of popular dramas to the iPlayer service for people who are self-isolating.
School year groups will have their own shows on iPlayer, with each accompanied by a self-learning programme for students in order to maintain ongoing education during an expected shutdown. There will also be daily educational podcasts for BBC Sounds, while plans to scrap the afternoon broadcast of CBBC's Newsround bulletin have been delayed so children can remain informed.
The decision to pause filming on EastEnders and other long-running dramas including Casualty, Doctors and Holby City comes as broadcasters face the prospect of months of empty schedules.
In an effort to ensure EastEnders remains on air for as long as possible, the BBC will cut the number of episodes broadcast from four to two a week, using already filmed footage. With the show filmed weeks before broadcast, the decision to halve the output means it could be possible for the show to stay on air for several months.
Other shows affected by the BBC's decision to stop filming include the Welsh-language soap opera Pobol y Cwm and the Scottish drama River City.
Many dramas have been rushing to finish filming before sets are shut down, and thousands of freelance staff in the British television industry are facing loss of work. This week the Guardian revealed that filming on Line of Duty and the new series of Peaky Blinders had been suspended.
Other measures the BBC announced on Wednesday include regular church services broadcast to the nation by the archbishop of Canterbury, updates on consumer matters relating to coronavirus on The One Show, and delays to the planned closure of the red button news service.
There are also plans to get exercise routines for older people and other fitness programming into people's homes on TV or radio so Britons can stay fit. Plans also include live fundraising events to raise money for good causes that can help mitigate the impact of coronavirus.
The director general, Tony Hall, said the BBC would be using all its resources "to help keep the nation informed, educated and entertained". Privately, some BBC executives point out that the corporation is showing its value as a public service broadcaster after a long period of attacks from politicians.
The corporation has already streamlined its level of news programming in order to keep a core news service on air during the crisis.