UK funeral directors may stream burials of coronavirus victims
Industry also calls for personal protection equipment for moving Covid-19 casualties
Funeral directors are considering streaming burials over Facebook for the families of coronavirus victims as part of measures discussed with government officials.
Civil servants were also pressed over the need for staff and morticians to be instructed to wear full-body protective clothing while handling victims' bodies in a call with representatives of the UK's undertakers.
The government is expected to bring forward legislation this week to help funeral directors handle thousands of deaths expected from the Covid-19 virus. It follows concerns raised by pathologists that current legislation allows coronavirus victims to have open coffins and have their bodies embalmed while remaining contagious.
The National Society of Allied and Independent Funeral Directors and the National Association of Funeral Directors were among organisations which coordinated a conference call with the Cabinet Office on Tuesday.
According to sources one suggestion raised with government officials was to encourage mourners to stream funerals over social media to friends and family.
Modern crematoriums tend to be equipped to broadcast funerals via the internet to mourners living abroad. Funeral directors believe that social distancing and self-isolation could see more people take up this option. Family members who do attend could be advised to stand further apart during a funeral service, or limit numbers.
There were also calls for the government to give funeral directors access to personal protection equipment if they are removing bodies from homes where someone is suspected of having died from Covid-19.
Burials could also take place with a memorial at a later date, according to Alison Crake, a funeral director who helped draw up the nationwide pandemic plan for the funeral industry.
"The likelihood is a family will be self-isolating immediately after someone has died. We are concerned about inconsistencies which is making it very difficult for us to give advice. It may be that a family takes a decision to have a smaller service now and a memorial service at a later date," said Crake, who did not take part in Tuesday's meeting.
She said it was "natural instinct" for people grieving the death of a loved one to reach out and comfort each other and the government needed to clarify what would be a safe way to congregate in the case of a funeral.
"A traditional funeral where you expect people to go into a venue, a church, a crematorium chapel – if you think of the advice on social distancing and if you think what happens at the funeral, it's a very natural instinct to comfort people and have your family close to you.
"We need to think about what advice we give people to help [them] understand where there is different advice in terms of older people. Earlier start times for burials are also likely, with the usually unpopular 9am slots likely to be filled," she said.
Crake's guidance suggests all staff removing an infected body should wear a long-sleeved gown, goggles and a face mask.
The Association of Anatomical Pathology Technology (AAPT), which represents morticians, is seeking urgent clarification from Public Health England (PHE) over the rules of handling the bodies of coronavirus victims.
A leaked email from the organisation said: "AAPT are aware of the latest guidance stating that body bags are not required and that viewing, hygienic preparation, viewing and embalming are all permitted. We are urgently trying to clarify this guidance with PHE, especially around body bags and personal protective clothing."
The Irish Association of Funeral Directors provoked criticism last week when it said all funeral services for coronavirus victims should be postponed, and the deceased brought straight to the crematorium or cemetery for committal. It also recommended banning family members from funeral homes and limousines for transport.
The British government has been reluctant to put a definitive figure on the number of potential Covid-19 deaths in the months ahead. On Monday, modelling from Imperial College suggested that the government's new action plan might reduce the estimated number of deaths from 260,000 to 20,000.
Asked to comment on the suggested measures discussed with civil servants, a government spokesperson said: "We have been clear from the outset that we expect coronavirus to impact the UK, which is why we are undertaking sensible contingency planning for every eventuality – including the reasonable worst-case scenario."