Schools in England struggle to stay open as coronavirus hits attendance
Headteachers question official policy of staying open as staff and students stay at home
Schools across England are struggling to stay open, with some forced to partially or fully close as staff and students stay at home, while the UK remains one of only two European countries – alongside Belarus – with a policy of not closing them.
Headteachers have said they were blindsided by Monday's government advice for the public to avoid non-essential contact. Pressure has been growing on the government to shut schools, after Finland announced wholescale closures on Monday and Sweden advised its colleges to close.
Several schools have announced closures because of staff shortages, in some cases with only pupils on GCSE and A-levels courses allowed to remain. But many more school leaders are being forced to consider closures as staff are absent because of self-isolation or caring for vulnerable relatives.
Headteachers complained they have received little or nothing in the way of direct advice from the Department for Education about coping with staff shortages or even why they need to stay open.
"We're deeply worried by this – we have lots of staff now off looking after vulnerable relatives and there are absolutely no supply teachers out there. Everyone who can be on duty is already here, and I expect things to get worse day by day," said George Croxford, the headteacher of Royal Wootton Bassett Academy in Wiltshire.
"The prime minister told people to avoid contact but we have nearly 200 adults working here. What about them?"
Sir Patrick Vallance, the government's chief scientific adviser, defended the policy before the Commons health committee. "If you look across the world, for example, Singapore hasn't closed schools. It's introduced some different measures in schools. Taiwan, I think didn't close schools in managing it," he told MPs.
But critics pointed out that Singapore is still considering school closures, while Taiwan actually did close all its schools for an extended period in February, when the country had just 10 confirmed cases of coronavirus.
Schools in London appear to be hardest hit, with absentee rates for staff running at 20% or more, after Boris Johnson announced new policies on Monday night telling the public to avoid all non-essential travel and contact and advising those with any symptoms to remain in isolation for 14 days.
A string of independent schools, including Westminster School and City of London Girls School, announced that they were closing their classrooms tomorrow and teaching pupils online for the foreseeable future.
Jenny Brown, the City of London school's headmistress, told parents the closure came "in the face of unsustainable pupil and staff absence from the site over the past couple of days".
Some state school heads in London reported absentee rates among pupils reaching up to 50% in some year groups, with hundreds staying away at big secondary schools in the capital.
Derbyshire county council issued an alert that Dronfield Henry Fanshawe school would be closed from Tuesday "due to a significant number of staff who will not be able to come to school following the government announcement regarding self-isolation."
Martyn Cooper, the head, told parents: "We have analysed the staffing and concluded that there is a significant number of staff who will not be able to come to school. This means that it will not be possible to function safely and securely as a school."
Ark Bolingbroke academy in Wandsworth, south-west London, has announced it will close indefinitely from Wednesday for pupils in years 7, 8 and 9 because of "logistical and staffing issues which make this challenging".
"It is our intention to remain open for year 11 and 13 for as long as possible, which will be dependent on the exams system for this summer," the school told parents
South Shore academy in Blackpool also said it was partially closing until further notice "due to high levels of staff absence". The school will only teach pupils studying for GCSEs, although those eligible for free school meals can pick up packed lunches.
Other schools are putting year groups on revolving closures. Maiden Erlegh school near Reading said that from Wednesday most pupils would only attend every other day, although pupils preparing for exams will remain fulltime.
Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said reports suggested up to 20% of teachers were self-isolating and the number was rising.
School attendance was also falling, he said, typically running at between 70-80%. "It is clearly becoming increasingly difficult to keep schools open and we now urgently need some clear strategic planning from the government," Barton said.
Schools that remain open are drawing up contingency plans for closure in the near future, with some vowing to keep their kitchens open in order to feed children from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Chris Dyson, the head of Parklands primary in Leeds, said his school kitchen would remain open to supply lunches to primary age children in the city who are entitled to free school meals.
"My parents at my school would come in to collect at takeaway lunch and we'd act as a central hub, cooking for all the schools in Leeds," said Dyson. About 80% of the children at Parklands are entitled to free school meals.
The DfE announced that regular Ofsted inspections of schools, colleges and social care provision in England would be suspended for the time being, following similar decisions in Scotland and Wales.
"It's clearly the right thing to do when teachers and social workers are under pressure as a result of the coronavirus outbreak," said Amanda Spielman, Ofsted's chief inspector of schools in England.
The National Education Union released a letter it has sent to Johnson, calling on him to order at least partial closures of schools in England in recognition of the staffing problems created by his policies.
"Given your failure to release modelling comparing different scenarios of school closures, we are now forced to call on you to close schools, at least for some time and at least in some areas," the letter from the NEU's general secretaries states.
