Talking Horses: all racing to go behind closed doors from Tuesday
Monday's meeting at Kelso the first to be staged behind closed doors, while BHA offices shut down in London
The British Horseracing Authority confirmed yesterday that all British racing will be behind closed doors from today until at least the end of March, while Randox Health, the medical research company which sponsors the Grand National, has cancelled all its hospitality arrangements at next month's three-day meeting, effectively confirming the race will take place behind closed doors or not at all.
The move behind closed doors was confirmed by the BHA earlier in the day, shortly after the authority's announcement that its own offices will be closed for an indeterminate period after some members of staff showed symptoms of coronavirus.
The BHA said that while some meetings may be cancelled at short notice, its aim "is to agree a programme that is sustainable, in the light of possible staff absences, including in critical roles, in order to protect industry staff and support the wider effort to free up critical public services".
The French racing programme, which had been behind closed doors for a fortnight, has been abandoned until at least 15 April.
"Our top priority is the wellbeing of everyone involved in the horse racing industry and to be fully compliant with the state directives," Édouard de Rothschild, the president of France Galop, said in a statement yesterday.
Wetherby 2.00 Flanagans Field 2.35 Global Fame 3.10 Lady Master 3.45 Bobndave (nap)4.20 Bobo Mac 4.55 Espoir Moriviere (nb)5.25 Glencassley
Taunton 2.15 Mille Sussurri 2.50 Vinnie's Getaway 3.25 This Breac 4.00 Playa Blanca4.35 Adherence 5.10 Fair Kate
"Above all, we want to protect every-one from the pandemic, which is why we have suspended all race meetings. With this decision, the French horse racing industry also shows its solidarity and responsibility towards the whole nation."
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.