Aged care minister won't resign despite Labor's continued attacks on government's Covid response
Richard Colbeck says his recent missteps are not indicative of the work he's doing 'more broadly in the portfolio'
Aged care minister Richard Colbeck insists he has the confidence of the prime minister, and has not considered resigning, as Labor resumed its parliamentary attack on the government's record during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Colbeck told reporters on Monday his recent missteps, like failing to recall the number of Australians who had died in residential aged care during the pandemic, were not indicative "of the work that I'm doing more broadly in the portfolio".
"No, I haven't considered my resignation," he said.
With Labor preparing for another question time offensive, and with the Victorian government reporting another 41 deaths on Monday – a total that included fatalities that had only recently been reported to the state health department – the Morrison government unveiled another $563.3m for the aged care sector.
The package includes funding for providers to support enhanced infection control capability and workforce retention payments.
But the government was unable to answer questions about how many workers were still working across multiple aged care facilities.
Colbeck also confirmed that there was a period when the regulator ceased unannounced visits to check on practices within the facilities, but he said inspections had now resumed.
The aged care minister told reporters the latest injection of funding for the sector "demonstrates the work that I am doing to ensure that residents in aged care across Australia get the support that they need".
In the lower house, Labor leader Anthony Albanese asked Scott Morrison why Colbeck was still the aged care minister.
Morrison said Colbeck was the minister because he was a successful advocate for the sector. "Under this aged care minister, $1.5bn of additional support has been put into the aged care sector during the Covid-19 crisis."
"When additional resources are required to address the significant challenges in aged care sector, the minister has consistently brought forward submissions for additional support to be provided right across the board in aged care sector."
Morrison was asked why commonwealth government funded and regulated aged care facilities were still unprepared for outbreaks. The health minister, Greg Hunt, took the question, and referred Labor to the plans that had been developed by the medical expert panel.
Hunt said that had provided a "framework for cooperation which has allowed thousands of lives to have been saved".
"We grieve every life lost, every single life lost, but we also know that what we have done through containment and capacity has made a profound difference," the health minister said.
As Labor is continuing to muscle up on aged care, the government is doubling down with the states. The government is applying pressure to the states to unwind border and other restrictions imposed to stop the spread of infections.
Early on Monday, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, declared that Victoria's premier, Daniel Andrews, had presided over the "biggest public policy failure by a state government in living memory" and demanded the premier give Victorians an indication about when stage four restrictions would end.
Morrison told parliament he wanted border restrictions to be gone by Christmas, and said leaders needed to focus "on the road back" after the pandemic.
Albanese asked Morrison why he was arguing with the premiers instead of fixing an aged care system that was in crisis and "an economy that is in recession for the first time in 30 years".
Morrison said the national cabinet had delivered for Australians during the pandemic. "We have worked together as a national cabinet to achieve many things together," the prime minister said.
"There have been some areas of disagreement, I grant you that, but compared to the way the states and territories and the commonwealth would argue under Coag, where issues went largely to retire rather than be promoted – the national cabinet has gone the other way."
The prime minister said he was not disputing the fact that premiers could determine border closures and other restrictions. But he said the leaders needed to keep looking towards economic recovery.
"The road back for our economy is to ensure that we can see the jobs continue to come back to our economy, whether it is in New South Wales, Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania or anywhere else," Morrison said.