Victoria's daily Covid cases will be below 100 next week if trend continues, Brett Sutton says
Despite 12 new coronavirus deaths, number of new cases going 'in right direction', with 113 for second day in row
Victoria's daily case numbers are expected to dip below 100 by next week, the state's chief health officer says.
Prof Brett Sutton confirmed Victoria's numbers are "trending in the right direction" after the state recorded a second day in a row of 113 new cases on Friday.
"It's not gotten below 100 yet, I do expect that to happen, if not over the weekend, then by next week, if trends continue. We obviously have to hold the course here," he said.
But Sutton said the state was unlikely to see a similar reduction in the number of deaths in the coming days.
Victoria's death toll is now sitting close to 500 after 12 more people have died, all linked to aged care outbreaks.
"I think it could be a while before we see the daily mortality figures come down, but it is stabilising. We are not seeing it increase and the idea is it's expected to slowly decrease," he said.
In response to the debate over whether people are dying "of Covid-19" or "with Covid-19" Sutton confirmed that a quarter to a third of all people in aged care in Victoria who contracted the virus have since died.
"Coronavirus is a very significant illness in the population and it is not unreasonable to classify those deaths as deaths from coronavirus, when we understand that that wouldn't happen in a normal week, in a normal fortnight, in aged care," he said.
Sutton noted that as the Covid-19 death reporting criteria is standardised across the country, Victoria could see some reclassification of deaths, with people added and removed from the state's toll.
There are now 513 Victorians in hospitals, 29 in intensive care and 17 requiring a ventilator. Sutton said the majority of those in the hospital were residents of aged care homes currently experiencing outbreaks, who were unable to safely stay at the facility.
Next week Victoria will enter the fifth of six weeks of lockdown, and attention has turned to what the next phase of physical distancing restriction will look like. The premier, Daniel Andrews, confirmed stay at home orders were unlikely to end when stage four is scheduled to expire on 13 September.
"To be frank with people, the notion we would go from stage four to stage two or stage one … we're not going to be able to do that. It will have to be gradual and steady because we've all got to be really careful to make sure nothing we do makes it more likely that we find ourselves back here at exactly this place," he said.
"The way I put it is, 113 cases, this is very much like a public health bushfire and we're getting close to putting it out. If we were to reopen at 113 while the fire is still going – not smouldering, still burning – it would only be a matter of time before it got to us again."
Andrews and Sutton have avoided putting forward a set number of daily cases where it would be safe to reopen, but they have previously suggested that this would need to be in the low single digits, even requiring some days with zero new cases.
The number of Covid-19 cases among healthcare workers jumped by 134 to a total of 449 on Friday. Andrews said this was due in part to reclassification as disability workers who had not been previously included.
As of 27 August there were 45 active cases in disability facility settings, including 31 staff and 14 residents. There are 1,362 active cases in aged care.
Regional Victoria has also improved significantly in recent days and weeks, with only 187 actives cases outside Melbourne. The city of Geelong now has only 65 active cases and Bendigo has 15.
Communities along the state's western border with South Australia experienced some reprieve on Friday, with the relaxation of travel between states coming into effect.
Now those living within 40 km of the border can cross over for employment and education purposes, to provide or receive care or support, to buy food or fuel, or for medical care or supplies.
Victorians can only venture up to 40 kilometres into South Australia, must apply for a permit and are required to wear a face mask while interstate.
They must also have received a negative Covid-19 test result within the last seven days.
South Australians will also be allowed into Victoria but are still strongly advised not to travel there unless they live in a border community or are travelling for an essential reason.
Andrews also confirmed the state and federal governments have finalised arrangements for a joint disability response centre in order to help control and coordinate responses to outbreaks in disability facilities.
"That integrates the state control centre and other senior functions from the commonwealth government as well. That's up and running as of today," Andrews said.
"Thank you to the commonwealth government and its agencies for a very productive partnership on that front."