Liberal fundraiser goes ahead despite advice for MPs to avoid social gatherings
Party's WA branch says only 10 guests attended event, which complied with ACT restrictions
The Liberal party pressed ahead with a small fundraiser in Canberra this week despite advice that politicians should avoid social gatherings during the sitting period.
The event, organised by the Western Australian Liberals, was initially advertised as a $2,500-a-head fundraising dinner with the assistant minister to the prime minister, Ben Morton.
A spokesman for the WA Liberals confirmed the event had gone ahead at the National Press Club on Wednesday but was conducted in line with the health advice and Covid-19 restrictions of the Australian Capital Territory.
There were only 10 guests, the spokesman said, and all were from Canberra.
"While it was not a requirement of the venue, the National Press Club, the event proceeded with no greater than 10 attendees and no guests were from outside of the Canberra region," the spokesman said.
"The event occurred in full accordance with the National Press Club's COVIDSafe Plan. We are very confident that National Press Club management and board would only permit events and operations at their venue in a COVIDSafe manner and in full compliance with ACT health regulations."
The gathering easily meets the ACT restrictions, which allow for gatherings of a maximum of 100 people, with one person for every 4 sq m in both indoor and outdoor spaces.
But separate advice from parliament's presiding officers last week advised politicians against social gatherings while they were in Canberra.
"Social gatherings are strongly discouraged," the advice said.
The advice is aimed at mitigating the risk of Covid-19 spread during the sitting period.
In July the acting chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, advised that, even with mitigation measures, sitting periods posed a high risk of spreading Covid-19, given the sudden influx of politicians, staffers, lobbyists and others to Canberra from all over the country.
The risk was considered too great to allow the planned early sitting period in the first two weeks of August.
Guardian Australia reported this month that the Liberal party was planning three fundraisers during the current sitting period, all featuring Morton.
Wednesday night's event was the only one to proceed. Another event had been postponed for reasons unrelated to Covid-19, the spokesman said.
Morton, the member for Tangney, has previously said the events were not organised by his office but by the Tangney campaign. "It would be wrong to suggest it was arranged by the assistant minister's office," a spokeswoman said.
He did not respond to further requests for comment on Thursday.
When Guardian Australia reported that fundraisers were being planned, it prompted criticism from parts of the crossbench and the opposition. Morton was approached for comment but did not respond.
The initial invitation said Simon Birmingham, the trade minister, would appear at the event.
It is understood Birmingham attended.
The resumption of parliament was accompanied by strict measures and advice designed to prevent a Covid-19 outbreak. Victorian MPs were required to undertake a two-week quarantine period and parliament was closed to visitors.
Politicians were advised not to congregate in groups and to avoid face-to-face meetings, while those from greater Sydney and Newcastle were advised against going to aged care homes, hospitals, retail and hospitality venues, and other high-risk settings.