Children in Covid-hit Brisbane youth prison must be released immediately, advocates say
Centre is like an aged care facility but worse, says advocate Debbie Kilroy who is preparing bail applications for detainees
Advocates for children inside a Brisbane youth detention centre are preparing a series of bail applications seeking their immediate release, as the number of coronavirus cases linked to the compound reaches double figures.
On Monday, Queensland authorities said they had detected one additional case of Covid-19, which was linked to a worker from the youth detention centre at Wacol.
Five workers at the centre are among those to test positive. The other cases are understood to be close contacts of those workers.
The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, told reporters on Monday that all of the children and teenagers detained at the centre had been tested and only a few results were not yet known.
In response to the outbreak, any new detainees have been sent to Queensland's only other youth detention centre, 1,300km away in Townsville.
The entire workforce at the Brisbane centre will also be replaced temporarily this week.
However, concerns remain that children have been left in vulnerable circumstances and advocates are calling for their release.
The parents of one detainee told Guardian Australia they were "fearful" for their child, with whom they had had little contact in recent days.
"We are very anxious but we just can't seem to get any answers, other than assurances the kids are safe," the detainee's mother said.
"They aren't going to keep him there forever, so I just don't understand why they can't come back where they are safe. If they want him back when things have calmed down, then so be it."
Debbie Kilroy, who runs the prisoner advocacy group Sisters Inside, said the group was attempting to secure the release of as many children as possible.
"We are pulling a legal team together this week to undertake as many bail applications as we can to get as many children out as we can," Kilroy said.
"I'm very concerned about the children's welfare. I was in a youth prison for years on and off. They would be terrified, the trauma would be horrific.
"This is supposed to be a health response to a pandemic. But in prison, the response is about keeping children locked in.
"Inside you can't social distance. There's not enough sanitiser. They're like cruise ships and aged care facilities. But even worse because you're being locked into an isolated cell and an isolated unit."
Kilroy said each child should be released into "safe, appropriate" accommodation.
"We know the majority are kids in care of the state, the majority are on remand, the majority can't get accommodation because the state is not providing that.
"Seventy per cent are Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children. Set them free."
All visits to the centre have been postponed until further notice, and all group activities cancelled while the facility is in quarantine.
On its website, the Queensland Department of Youth Justice said children could engage in individual activities such as "reading, playing games [and] listening to music".
The director general, Bob Gee, told reporters at the weekend that some inmates had been allowed to undertake structured indoor activities "like table tennis".
"I can assure their families they are getting the very, very best support," Gee said.
"They're well looked after, they have been talking to families. As staff results come in we will be able to do more to let those young people have more access to activities.
"They have been particularly patient and well behaved and I wanted to thank them for the behaviour they've shown."
There are 18 active coronavirus cases in Queensland, including 10 linked to the youth detention cluster.