Queensland introduces coronavirus restrictions as second NSW quarantine guard tests positive
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk reports nine new Covid-19 cases, including six linked to Brisbane youth detention centre, as NSW announces another nine infections
Queensland has announced new coronavirus restrictions and locked down aged care homes and disability accommodation in the state's south-east after the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, reported nine new Covid-19 cases on Saturday.
The moves came as a second hotel quarantine security guard tested positive to Covid-19 in New South Wales, where nine new cases were reported, and Victoria reported 13 more deaths and 182 new cases.
On Saturday morning, the Queensland premier reported six new cases associated with the Brisbane youth detention centre in Wacol.
All children at the facility remained in lockdown after a worker was diagnosed with Covid-19 on Wednesday. The 77-year-old Ipswich woman had experienced mild symptoms and continued to work at the facility while infectious.
Testing will continue over the weekend, but so far no children have been diagnosed. The total of seven cases linked to the youth detention centre consists of five workers associated with the centre and two relatives of workers.
The centre's 127 residents have been in lockdown since Wednesday evening, while all 500 staff members are being tested.
Australia's acting chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, said he was confident the cluster could be contain.
"Where [the original worker's infection] come from is probably the most concerning part" he said.
"[The infected workers were] out in the community in different parts of south Queensland and so that is concerning, but I'd say that I'm very confident of colleagues in Queensland, the chief health officer and staff, they have got under this very quickly."
The other three cases announced on Saturday were crew members on cargo ships.
Palaszczuk said all indoor and outdoor gatherings without a Covid-safe plan in Queensland's south-east would immediately be capped at 10 people.
"That includes people living in the [local government] areas of Brisbane, Ipswich, Logan, Scenic Rim, Lockyer Valley and Moreton Bay and Redlands," she said.
A 30-person limit on gatherings will be enforced elsewhere in the state.
Public and private hospital emergency departments have been instructed to use PPE to treat all patients and asked to restrict visitors as soon as possible.
Palaszczuk said she was concerned about the Brisbane youth detention centre cluster "because people have been out and about in the community".
"We do expect there could be even more cases linked to this cluster but we will not know those until further results come in," she said.
In NSW, the case of the second security guard working in the hotel quarantine system, who was also working at the Marriott hotel in Circular Quay, was confirmed after 8pm on Friday.
The first Marriott guard had been diagnosed positive on Tuesday, having already worked shifts at Sydney's Flemington Markets and Parramatta local court.
The NSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, said the two infected guards worked together on just one shift, the day before the first guard was diagnosed.
"That newly diagnosed guard worked at the hotel [Marriott hotel in Circular Quay] on the 3rd, 5th, 9th, 10th and 11th of August, and both guards worked on the same shift on just one occasion, on 3rd of August," she said.
Chant said the two guards did not know each other socially and authorities were investigating when they might have come into close contact during their shared shift.
Contacts at the Sheraton Grand hotel at Hyde Park will also be tested out of "ultimate prudence and as a precaution" after the second guard worked one shift overnight on 16 August.
Genomic testing has revealed that the first security guard more than likely contracted the virus from a returned traveller, rather than from the NSW community.
"The results of the sequence testing showed that the first guard appears to have a strain of the Covid-19 virus similar to one identified in a guest staying at the hotel from 31 July to 5 August. The newly diagnosed guard does not appear to have had contact with this guest," a spokesperson from the state's health department said.
"The virus from the newly diagnosed case's sample has also been sent for sequencing. Exactly how these infections were acquired is under investigation."
Kelly was also asked about the security guard cases during a Saturday press conference. He said the country would learn from the incident.
"It really reinforces what I've just said about the importance of keeping that quarantine component as part of our external border controls, as safe and effective as possible," he said.
"Mistakes happen. Wearing personal protective equipment is not something that security guards, necessarily, are used to or potentially good at. It's very easy to make a slip-up in relation to personal protective equipment, even for a well-trained healthcare worker."
Infection control issues with the hotel quarantine have caused considerable public concern in NSW given that it has been suggested more than 90% of Victoria's second wave cases can be traced back to outbreaks in their own returned traveller program.
The nine new cases in NSW in the 24 hours to 8pm on Friday came from almost 31,000 tests and included two cases still under investigation.
One NSW case announced on Saturday was a household contact of a previously reported case connected to Tangara School for Girls in Cherrybrook, which is set to reopen its doors on Monday. Another two cases were contacts of a case connected to the Sydney funeral cluster.
NSW Health on Saturday also confirmed another previously reported case had visited Westfield Mt Druitt while infectious on 12 August and 14. Those who visited the shopping centre were urged to monitor for symptoms.
"While case numbers have remained low this week, the virus continues to circulate in the community and vigilance must be maintained," NSW Health's Dr Jeremy McAnulty said.
Palaszczuk said on Saturday that additional testing centres were being established around south-east Queensland to encourage more people to come forward.
"What we also need are Queenslanders to realise, especially in south-east Queensland, is that if you have any symptoms whatsoever, we need you to get tested now."
The cases mark Queensland's first locally acquired transmissions in more than a month.
Queensland's chief medical officer, Dr Jeannette Young, on Saturday said the detention centre-linked cases were residents of Bundamba, Marsden, Carindale, North Ipswich and Forest Lake, and contact tracing was under way. She also suggested vulnerable people stay at home over the weekend.
She said changes would not be made to gatherings at commercial venues at this stage."While we are keeping a watch on commercial venues, they have CovidSafe plans in place and measures to contact trace people if required," Young said.
The ACT and Western Australia reported no new coronavirus cases on Saturday.
The Northern Territory, which was holding its election on Saturday, also reported no new cases. Covid-19 restrictions limited the amount of people allowed in polling booths and poll booth sausage sizzles were banned.