'Appalling and inconsistent': how Melbourne's hotel quarantine unleashed a second wave
The first week of the inquiry heard scientific evidence and stories of inadequate training, lack of PPE and unclean hotel rooms
The hotel quarantine inquiry, chaired by former judge Jennifer Coate, was set up to find out what went wrong in the quarantine scheme that began in Victoria on March 29. Infections that began in hotels were the source of the state's serious "second wave" of coronavirus infections. The first week of public evidence dealt with the science of determining where clusters initiated and what the experience of working at the hotels and being detained in them was like. Here's what we learned.
Victoria's second wave is almost entirely linked to the hotel quarantine program
We already had a strong sense of this, but the inquiry's hearings confirmed and explained it. In hindsight, the story is tragic. By early May, the 44 clusters of coronavirus cases that had appeared in early March – overwhelmingly single cases brought in by people arriving from overseas – had all but petered out, according to genomic sequencing by the Doherty Institute's microbiological diagnostic unit. Victoria was in a similar position to every other state.
The unit is attempting to genetically sequence every case of coronavirus in Victoria, working out the complete sequence of the pathogen's genome. Sequences can then be compared with others to draw conclusions about clusters.
What has now been established with a high degree of confidence is that, in May, coronavirus spread from two hotels – Rydges on Swanston and the Stamford Plaza. As Prof Ben Howden of the institute explained, of the 1,837 cases of local transmission sequenced since 8 May, 99.8% came from just three "transmission networks", with no evidence of any other clusters. One network was from Rydges and two from Stamford.
About 90% of cases in the state since May originated at Rydges and 10% from Stamford, both hotels used to quarantine people arriving in Melbourne from overseas.
Here's how it happened. On May 9, a family of four arrived from overseas and, over subsequent days, all tested positive for Covid-19. They were staying at Rydges and on 25 May, four members of staff became symptomatic, and genomic testing found they were from the same cluster. It's not certain how it was transmitted, but it was.
At the Stamford, a man returned on 21 June from overseas and became symptomatic. Separately, on June 11, a couple returned to Australia and also fell sick. On 10 June, the first staff member developed coronavirus symptoms.
Department of Health and Human Services epidemiologist Dr Prof Charles Alpren told the inquiry that for Victorians who had developed symptoms over the past month, 1,589 had been genetically sequenced. Of those, 1,577 were linked to the cluster from Rydges, and 12 from Stamford. There were no other genetically linked clusters in Melbourne
At the time of the first Rydges case hotel, May 26, there were 19 deaths from Covid-19 in Victoria. By Friday, that had risen to 385.
Quarantine is meant to be quarantine no matter where it takes place
Australia's mandatory 14-day quarantine for returning overseas travellers is credited as a key reason why the country's coronavirus response has been internationally impressive. A meeting of the national cabinet on 27 March decided on hotel quarantine with the states and territories to implement it "with the support of the Australian Defence Force and the Australian Border Force where necessary", as senior counsel assisting Tony Neal QC summarised it.
Victoria controversially used private security guards to secure those quarantined, and this will be picked apart by the inquiry next week to determine whether it made any difference to the second outbreak or if other factors were as important.
What we do know is that Victoria – and other states – scrambled to set up hotel quarantine over two days, with the first arrivals on 29 March. Prof Lindsay Grayson, the director of the infectious diseases and microbiology department at Austin Health, explained quarantine aimed to separate people who are or might be infected from others and to enforce their isolation.
"The assumption for anyone monitoring a quarantined person should be that the person is infectious," he said.
Quarantine facilities are "dangerous places" and "all of them [workers] need to be a little scared" to avoid infection, as well as being well trained in infection control.
At a minimum, Grayson suggested, anyone coming in contact with detainees should wear a mask, eye protection, a long-sleeved disposable gown and practice hand hygiene. If there was any physical contact, gloves should also be worn.
As for the training of security guards, the inquiry heard that as a condition of the contract between the government and private security companies, the guards had to complete a 30-minute online infection control module created by the federal department of health.
Grayson was scathing about that training, saying it read more like general information for the community, not as suitable for health staff or security guards dealing with potentially infectious people. The answer to a question about whether everyone should be wearing a mask was "false". That might be fine advice at the time for the general public, he said, but not for those working in quarantine.
"This is misleading for healthcare workers or quarantine staff, if they thought they didn't need to wear a mask, when I would consider it crucial if they were in likely contact with a potentially infectious patient."
Witnesses reported that infection control was inadequate
There were numerous witnesses who told alarming stories about infection lapses in hotel quarantine.
Michael Tait, a nurse with 20 years' experience, worked at four hotels. He said nurses were overwhelmed with work and sometimes lacked PPE.
Security guards were untrained in the proper use of PPE, in his experience. It was "constantly just thrown on the floor when the security guards were finished with it instead of being disposed of correctly. It was obvious they didn't understand the importance or even the use of PPE." (Later, one security guard said he did receive training in PPE.)
Nurse Jen, whose surname was suppressed, worked mostly at the Park Royal hotel after being employed casually through Your Nursing Agency. There were "definitely not" good PPE practices, with guards making coffee with gloves on, and wearing masks with their noses exposed. You'd pop to the bathroom and see a mask in the waste bin" instead of properly disposed of.
Quarantined guests also worried about infection control, some believing they had a greater chance of contracting Covid in the hotel than if they had been allowed to quarantine at home.
"We were nervous for our safety," said prominent human rights lawyer Hugh de Kretser who quarantined at the Rydges hotel with his wife and two children after returning from the United States in late June. On at least two occasions a staff member came to the room without a face mask, he said. The rooms were unclean when the family arrived, with used disposable gloves on the floor, and food and rubbish on the carpet.
"We were shocked about how unclean they were ... What we saw completely undermined any confidence [in the program]."
Another detainee, nurse Liliana Ratcliff, spent two weeks in May at the Stamford with her children. She was so alarmed at the lack of social distancing and poor infection control among staff and guards that she made a formal complaint to the department but said she never received a reply.
"In quarantine I was tearing my hair out knowing the infection processes were not right but not knowing how to protect people."
Park ranger Luke Ashford, who was employed as an authorised officer in the quarantine system, said he was given no training in infection control before his first shift. He felt so unsafe he resigned.
The last witness on Friday was a security guard whose identity was suppressed. He said his infection control training was adequate, but that guards risked spreading the virus because many worked across multiple hotels. A few who were fired from one hotel for substandard work took up the job at other hotels.
The treatment of detainees was poor in some cases
Detainees with serious health conditions, including mental health problems, were often poorly treated, according to witnesses.
While witnesses reported that most staff did their best and were trying to help, the processes were often shambolic and chaotic, with little understanding of who was in charge, and with staff and policies changing often.
Nurse Jen described one experience of a woman with endometriosis who was in "excruciating pain, hunched over, almost in foetal position, and sobbing, unable to speak in full sentences". She had found traditional Chinese medicine to be most effective in relieving pain and required a kettle to boil water.
"DHSS pushed back really hard. Anything electrical needed to be tagged and tested and [they] would not be doing that for this person." The nurse ended up buying painkillers herself to help the woman.
She described another incident where a detainee had threatened suicide, and the doctor on duty had not been made aware of it.
"A person who worked for DHHS told me they had specifically called this guest in the room and told them that they needed to stop threatening suicide just so they can get a cigarette."
After several unsuccessful attempts to phone the person, Jen and the doctor knocked on the door, to find the person distressed but unharmed.
"I was very angry with everything that had been going on at the hotel at that point."
Some detainees were offered "fresh air breaks" – generally once a week for about 10 to 20 minutes – but others, like Kate Hyslop and Ricky Singh, who were quarantined in April, said they had no outside break, nor were they ever tested for Covid. "From our experience … we gained the impression the whole thing was very poorly organised. Communication was appalling and inconsistent and added to the overall stress."
Liliana Ratcliffe was so worried about what she saw she staged her own protest. When she was called each day to ask about her symptoms, "I elected to say I do not consent to answer your questions because I am protesting." She was worried about detainees with mental health problems, high-risk patients and infection control.
In her letter of complaint to DHSS, she said the experience was "dehumanising".
"I cannot believe this detention is mandatory even for disabled persons, those with mental health issues, the elderly and those with dementia and children and pregnant women." The inquiry continues on Monday.