Eight NDIS participants have died from Covid, disability inquiry told
NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission reveals number after senior health officials conceded they didn't know
Eight people who access Australia's National Disability Insurance Scheme have died from Covid-19 since the start of the pandemic, the disability royal commission has been told.
The figure – the first time the total number of deaths among scheme participants has been reported by federal authorities – was revealed by the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission on Friday.
"The commission has had eight deaths reported to us of participants passing away from Covid-19 whilst positive with Covid-19, and one worker," Samantha Taylor, the NDIS Commission registrar, told the hearing.
Taylor said the worker who died was employed in an area outside of the commission's jurisdiction, which Guardian Australia understands to be a state-regulated facility in Victoria.
Under questioning by senior counsel assisting Kate Eastman SC, Taylor also conceded that the watchdog only investigated a tiny fraction of infections linked to the NDIS, prompting a rebuke from the royal commission chair.
Asked whether it followed up infections with providers, Taylor said it would not be "realistic or reasonable" to do so.
She said three investigations were underway in Victoria, all related to group home settings. On Friday, there were 116 active cases linked to the scheme in the state.
Taylor gave the example of a person whose provider had told the commission the participant had cancelled in-home services because they had tested positive.
"It would not be appropriate or reasonable for us to investigate such a matter," she said, adding that the commission would follow up if it had concerns about infection controls.
The commissioner, Ronald Sackville, responded: "How would you know whether the service provider had appropriate infection controls in place unless you investigated?"
Taylor reiterated that it would investigate if the watchdog had concerns, prompting Sackville to interrupt.
"How about the infection of the resident?" he said. "That's a pretty good indication, isn't it?"
She emphasised that the watchdog also worked with Victorian health authorities, which allowed it to ascertain whether further inquiries should be made into a case.
Earlier on Friday, the federal government was criticised at the royal commission for failing to collect broader data on the number of people with disabilities who have contracted or died from Covid-19.
Two senior health department officials were asked by Eastman how many people with disabilities had caught the virus, or died, since the start of the pandemic.
"We do not have perfect data on that issue," replied Simon Cotterell, the first assistant secretary at the Department of Health. "The answer is we don't know."
Nick Coatsworth, the deputy chief medical officer, also conceded he did not know how many people with disabilities had been affected by Covid-19 in Australia.
Asked to explain the federal government's failure to collect the data, he said that people with disabilities were "so heterogeneous in terms of risk or vulnerability to Covid-19" such statistics did not need to be included in the daily data reported by the Commonwealth National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.
"That is certainly not to say that it is not important to collect data on the effects of Covid-19 on people with disability," he said.
Coatsworth acknowledged many people with disabilities were more vulnerable to the virus than the general population, but added that there were also some who had "no more or less risk for Covid-19 than other members of the community".
He was later challenged by commissioner Rhonda Galbally, who said even those without specific clinical risks were still more likely to face "major issues of discrimination" and a lack of access to health services.
The disability royal commission is sitting in Sydney this week to examine how the coronavirus pandemic had impacted Australia's disability community.
On Friday, it also heard there was no mention of people with disabilities in the federal government's first pandemic plan, which Cotterell acknowledged was an omission.
"It was prepared very quickly and under great pressure, but by staff conscientiously doing their best," he said.
The lack of data around the number of people with disabilities affected by the virus has been raised by disability advocacy groups, as well as Labor's spokesman, Bill Shorten, who has called for real-time reporting of cases and deaths within the NDIS.
Earlier this week, the NDIS minister, Stuart Robert, said the government would start providing case numbers for scheme participants and workers.
But the statistics do not include the number of fatalities, and only include those cases reported to the NDIS commission by scheme providers, leaving out those who manage their own plan. Guardian Australia obtained data from the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission earlier this month showing three Victorian NDIS participants and one worker had died after testing positive since March.
While there are 400,000 NDIS participants, about 4.4 million people identify as having a disability in Australia, meaning the data now reported by the NDIS may only cover a fraction of all cases among people with disabilities.
In the UK, the country's Office of National Statistics reported in July more than 22,000 disabled people died from coronavirus, from 2 March to 15 May, making up two-thirds of all deaths.
Friday's session featuring commonwealth officials came as the federal and Victorian governments confirmed the creation of a $15m joint disability response centre, a week after reports that the federal government was resisting the proposal.
The new disability package announced on Friday will include a joint-funded worker mobility reduction payment scheme, which will compensate workers who are now only working at one site.
On Thursday, the royal commission heard that residential disability accommodation was at risk of infection, prompting calls for governments to seek to reduce the number of carers working across several homes.
Earlier this month, the Victorian government began reporting the number of cases in residential disability accomodation, with the current data showing 62 active Covid-19 cases in disability care sectors, across 60 different sites.
NDIS data showed that on Friday there were 117 cases, including three new participant infections, taking the total to 40, and 76 worker cases. All but one of the infections were in Victoria.