International travel cap keeping out 18,000 Australians who want to come home
Department of Foreign Affairs tells Covid-19 Senate inquiry almost 3,000 of those are classed as 'vulnerable' for medical or financial reasons
The cap on international arrivals to Australia is a "significant challenge" for 18,800 Australians overseas still trying to return home, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has said.
Dfat officials made the comments at the Covid-19 Senate inquiry on Thursday, appearing after tourism industry leaders who called for further federal assistance and criticised state premiers for "galling" interstate travel bans.
National cabinet halved the number of arrivals to Australia in July after Victoria stopped taking passengers at the onset of its second coronavirus wave.
The move prompted complaints from Australians left stranded overseas, particularly about airlines rationing seats by pushing passengers towards more expensive business class tickets.
Fiona Webster, Dfat's acting first assistant secretary of the consular and crisis management division, told the inquiry 371,000 Australians had returned home since March.
Some 27,000 remain overseas, including 18,800 who want to come home, 15% of whom – almost 3,000 – are classed as "vulnerable" for medical or financial reasons, she said.
Webster said the cap, which has limited arrivals to about 4,000 a week, was a "significant challenge" for Australians seeking to return home but the government had "little leverage" over airlines, which allocated seats based on "commercial decisions".
The Dfat secretary, Frances Adamson, said the government was "very aware" of the situation of Australians seeking to return home but reiterated that the cap was a health safety measure.
Labor foreign affairs spokeswoman, Penny Wong, called on the government to provide more financial assistance so "people shouldn't be forced to raid their super in order to return home".
"Scott Morrison should also be talking with state and territory leaders about what capacity they may have to help these Australians quarantine safely at home."
Ahead of the national cabinet meeting on Friday to discuss border bans and protocols to ease restrictions, tourism industry leaders made their pitch to bring down barriers in Queensland, the Northern Territory, Tasmania, South Australia and Western Australia.
Simon Westaway, the chief executive of the Australian Tourism Industry Council (ATIC), told the inquiry the tourism industry has been cut in half by coronavirus and associated restrictions, losing $80bn of revenue in annualised terms, including closed interstate borders estimated to cost $84m a day.
Westaway said that after a one-third reduction in the rolling seven-day average in new Covid-19 cases it was "quite galling" to see states and territories had "doubled down" on border bans.
He suggested state leaders should not be "dictated by public polls" and it was not good enough to expect the industry to "ride out" the Northern Territory and Queensland elections in the hope bans will be lifted in future.
ATIC put forward a proposal that after 14 days of no or negligible community transmission a state should outline a process for reopening their borders within 28 days.
Border controls should have "nationally consistent administrative arrangements" and be reassessed regularly using transparent criteria, Westaway said.
Jenny Lambert, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry's (ACCI) director of skills and education, said that business is "boiling over" about inconsistencies such as governments closing their borders due to "one [coronavirus] case in one area" or the decision to declare the ACT a hotspot despite no active cases.
She said without a roadmap with certainty around the protocol for reopening, many thousands of jobs will be lost in the sector.
John Hart, the executive chair of ACCI's tourism committee, warned against a "misconception" that intrastate tourism could make up for the loss of international and interstate visitors, saying tourism operators could hope to get 16% of normal revenue, at most, from that source.
Hart said tourism businesses serving international visitors will need support until a coronavirus vaccine is developed.
Although jobkeeper wage subsidies have been extended at a reduced rate until March 2021, Hart said support will be needed "not for one month, one quarter or even one year", but well into 2021.
Lambert said the reduction of the rate of jobkeeper would cause "some issues" for the tourism sector, which "may lose their talented individuals if they can find jobs elsewhere".
But she suggested industry support should now shift from wage subsidies for all businesses suffering downturns in the economy at large to "targeted support for tourism" operators facing revenue downturns of between 50% and 90%.
Several witnesses criticised the amount of the Coalition's $1bn "relief and recovery" fund that has been spent on tourism.
Some $100m was spent on regional airlines, $198m on regional air networks and $95m on zoos, but Labor's Murray Watt focused on the fund's other uses promoting the seafood industry, and supporting forestry and air freight.
Margy Osmond, the chief executive of the Tourism and Transport Forum, said there was "considerable concern that the $1bn tourism fund became a $1bn not tourism fund", describing it as an "ongoing bone of contention that it was not spent extensively in the industry".
Coralie Bell the chairperson of Australian Regional Tourism said that smaller tourism operators were in "crisis mode" and felt "very disconnected" from direct support and she was "disappointed" at the way the fund had been allocated.
Adamson said the fund was a "sectoral support fund" that covered a "wide range of sectors" that was reassigned from the trade portfolio to the infrastructure department after it became apparent there was a "broad call" on its funds.