Australian disability homes at risk of Covid-19 exposure, royal commission hears
Fears grow that workers crossing the aged care and disability sectors could spread the virus to the disability community
Carers working across multiple disability group homes and the aged care sector could spread the virus into the disability community, the royal commission has heard.
Prof Anne Kavanagh, the director of the Disability Institute at the University of Melbourne, said on Thursday federal and state authorities needed to look at ways to ensure "minimised movement of workers", and also warned about a lack of PPE training for some carers.
Describing a "perfect storm", she said that the closure of NDIS day-programs once lockdowns began meant carers "started working across multiple group homes because the residents were home more".
"That's a real issue and some of them work for multiple service providers and some work in aged care," she said.
"We have a perfect storm there and we really need to think through how we can do minimised movement of workers so they're only providing support for a specified number of people."
The royal commission is sitting in Sydney this week, examining how the pandemic has affected people with disabilities.
Comparisons have been made between residential disability accommodation services and the stricken aged care sector, where the majority of Covid-19 deaths in Australia have occurred.
Many residents are similarly vulnerable to the virus, although disability group homes usually cater to a fraction of the number of residents as aged care homes.
The federal government has announced a panel of major NDIS providers to offer workforce support to smaller providers, although it has also rejected a Victorian government proposal for a joint taskforce similar to the Aged Care Response Centre.
Stuart Robert, the federal NDIS minister, said last week "because of the significant support from the commonwealth, an NDIS participant is four times less likely to contract Covid-19 than the Victorian general public".
Kavanagh published a survey earlier this month of disability support workers that found about half of workers in June felt they needed more infection control training, the inquiry heard.
Only 23% of respondents had been tested at the time, the survey found. "Disability support workers were not recognised as an essential workforce like health care and age care workforces so they weren't prioritised for testing at that point in time," Kavanagh said.
That was "pretty terrible and something that we had been recommending from the start", she said.
Dr Dinesh Palipana, a doctor at Gold Coast hospital who has a spinal cord injury and uses a wheelchair, warned that people with disabilities could face discrimination accessing intensive care beds during the pandemic.
Health guidelines used in Europe allow the potential discrimination of people with disabilities, though these have not been adopted in Australia, the inquiry heard.
But Palipana said unconscious bias could still be a factor if Australia's health system was overwhelmed.
He said he was aware of some decision-makers, including people he described as close friends and colleagues, "who say that we need to give intensive care resources to patients who have the best chance of surviving".
"If you take me, a 35-year-old with a high-level spinal cord injury and a 35-year-old without and there's one intensive care bed, I can argue that I would have a poor chance of survival compared to the other person," he said.
"We often hear in medicine, for example, when we care for the elderly, I am sometimes, I've sometimes heard the conversation, 'Is this person a good eight-year-old or a crumbly 80-year-old?'
"The answer to this question can sometimes guide the decision-making and what care they get. In a similar vein, people with disability experience unfounded judgments about their quality of life and thus the care that they get."
On Thursday, there were 117 active cases within the NDIS across Australia, consisting of 37 clients and 80 workers. Only one case was outside Victoria.
In Victoria, there are 79 active cases in residential disability accommodation across about 50 sites.
The inquiry continues.