'Desperate' Australian hotels want overseas passenger caps raised to fill quarantine rooms
Industry boss says many city hotels are 'running at under 10% occupancy' and want to participate in quarantine program
Australian hotels are "absolutely desperate for more business" and are prepared to participate in quarantine programs to boost capacity for returned travellers if the government eases the strict cap on international passenger arrivals.
Michael Johnson, the chief executive of Tourism Accommodation Australia, a division of the Australian Hotels Association, said that the government had justified the cap as a way to ease pressure on hotel quarantine, but it was "more in place to slow the process, from a security perspective".
"There has always been this perception that at least quarantine was keeping the hotels full to make up for the loss of tourism. But many hotels in our CBDs are running at under 10% occupancy," he said.
He told the Guardian that when the government announced mandatory hotel quarantine, the industry "stepped up with very little notice".
"When quarantine first started we were taking 3,000 arrivals a day in Sydney alone ... so the government are aware there's availability on our end. There are a number of hotels prepared to participate in quarantine."
Johnson said only a "handful" of larger hotels, mostly with more than 500 rooms, were being used for quarantine, but that "all the other hotels are absolutely desperate for business".
Both government and opposition MPs have called for a reassessment of the caps, which can limit some flights into Australia to fewer than 30 passengers.
On Wednesday, the Guardian reported that planes flying into Australia were carrying as few as four economy passengers, and airlines were prioritising business-class passengers and more expensive tickets to remain profitable while complying with the limits.
The Guardian has been contacted by scores of Australians – including health workers and Australians who have briefly travelled overseas to visit dying relatives – who are facing an indefinite period away from home.
Many have reported having flights repeatedly cancelled and rescheduled for months later, while still being offered a seat on their original departure service if they pay thousands more per passenger to upgrade to business class – accusations which led the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission to investigate whether airlines are breaching consumer law by failing to honour economy bookings.
Introduced by the government in July and subsequently tightened, the passenger caps affect Australians with valid exemptions returning after brief travel for compassionate reasons. But many citizens living overseas who heeded government advice to book return flights, but required several months to finish jobs or sell their homes, are also among those stranded.
Sydney airport is limited to 350 international passenger arrivals a day. Perth's cap is 75, while Brisbane and Adelaide are each limited to 70 and Melbourne cannot accept any international flights. Earlier this month, the national cabinet decided to extend the arrival caps until 24 October.
On Wednesday, Qatar Airways was selling only business-class tickets to Australia, with a one-way Doha-to-Sydney ticket priced at $9,200, next available on 12 September. The next economy ticket available was on 19 October, for $3,600 one way.
Labor's infrastructure and transport spokeswoman, Catherine King, has called on the government to "talk to some states to see what capacity they might have" to increase arrival caps.
On Wednesday, King mentioned the case of Marianne Uldall, a Melbourne nurse and mother of three who told the Guardian she was "stuck" in Copenhagen after travelling there to visit her mother who suffered a stroke, but who now faces a wait of several months to return to home after her Qatar Airways economy ticket home was cancelled. Uldall has exhausted all her paid leave, and is the sole income earner for her family.
King said: "The cap is really important, we do need to keep the integrity of the quarantine system, but I do think, through national cabinet processes, it should not be beyond the wit of the government to say, are there some states where we have capacity for a brief period of time to try and deal with this issue of repatriating people who are in very desperate circumstances overseas?"
Liberal MP Jason Falinski said his office had been contacted by constituents and other Australians who were "struggling to secure flights back home".
"It would be helpful if other states such as Queensland and Western Australia could share some of the national burden and help increase capacity," Falinski said.
The deputy prime minister, Michael McCormack, who is responsible for the caps in his role as infrastructure and transport minister, has so far refused to address claims put to him by the Guardian that economy passengers appear to be overwhelmingly represented among those unable to return.
A spokesman for McCormack told the Guardian the caps were "vital to maintain the integrity of our national quarantine system".
"The government expects international airlines and travel agents to assist their passengers with their travel planning to return to Australia," the spokesman said.