Australian children with disabilities excluded from online learning during pandemic, inquiry told
Disability royal commission hears of cases where the curriculum was not modified for students during Covid-19 outbreak
Children with disabilities have been excluded from online home learning during the coronavirus pandemic and some students have been told to do housework in lieu of a modified curriculum, the royal commission has heard.
On the second day of hearings examining the effect of the pandemic on people with disabilities, the commission was told about NDIS participants who had missed out on their supports, while another woman who had been bedridden for years expressed worry that the access she had gained to digital services would end when the crisis ended.
One mother – known to the commission as ABB – said that when the pandemic led to the introduction of home learning, her daughter, who is 12 years old and lives with Down syndrome, was excluded from her school's Google Classroom platform.
"The first thing that happened was an email from one of the learning and support teachers that indicated that she had not been added to the Google Classroom, which is the platform that all the other students were using," she said.
"And, instead, I was sent a set of worksheets but those worksheets were straight downloads and didn't have anything to do with the work."
The mother said she eventually managed to gain access to the platform for her daughter, but that it highlighted the "low expectations" the school had for the 12-year-old. Some teachers made very little effort to ensure her daughter could participate in classes, ABB said.
Mary Sayers, the chief executive of Children and Young People with Disability Australia (CYDA), told the commission that the story was one that her organisation heard "time and time again".
"Again, this sadly is not a surprise for us," Sayers said. "Things like worksheets being sent home, like, 'Wash the car, clean your room, do the dishes.'
"That is not modifying the Australian curriculum and differentiating it for students with disability.
"We also heard the opposite, that complicated work was sent home and that was not modified and that work was left for the student to try and work it out for themselves."
Sayers said that a CYDA survey had found 72% of students with disability were more socially isolated than their peers, while 61% had not received adequate educational support during the pandemic.
The commission also heard evidence from Every Australian Counts, whose campaign director, Kirsten Deane, cited the groups's own survey, which found half of the 700 respondents were already living in poverty before the pandemic.
"Probably the biggest thing was the fact that people who were on the Disability Support Pension, or who received the carer's payment, were not given the additional coronavirus supplement as other groups were," Deane said.
Brisbane woman Samantha Dwyer, 28, who lives with a condition called Friedreich's ataxia, said the pandemic had a big impact on her quality of life.
She said she only had 30% lung capacity, meaning she was particularly vulnerable to the virus.
"A lot of my services were cancelled and I wasn't able to access them," Dwyer said. "It meant that everything changed. I had to stay at home a lot more."
Melbourne woman Ricky Buchanan, who has been bedridden for two decades with severe chronic fatigue syndrome, said she also had support workers cancel shifts.
One of her friends also went nine days without a carer, according to Buchanan's statement to the commission, which was read by the senior counsel assisting, Kate Eastman SC.
Buchanan also highlighted what she saw as the positives of the pandemic, including that she had new access to telehealth, NDIS webinars, film festivals, music concerts, free online courses, and even "going to the zoo".
"Everything I have been campaigning for, for 20 years, has now been dropped in my lap and I'm so scared they are going to go," she said.
"I keep doing so much but it is all up there in my computer. I feel I've been starved for 20 years and then dumped in an all-you-can-eat buffet restaurant and of course you will eat everything. This means I'm so ill I can't pace myself."
Eastman said Buchanan had made the "very strong point in her evidence about the accessibility of many of the community activities, as she says, that we take for granted".
Sarah Yahya, an advocate from a refugee background who lives with hearing impairment, told the commission she had been made to feel more vulnerable reading commentary on social media that Covid-19 was about "the survival of the fittest".
"It makes you feel, 'What are other people thinking at the moment?'" she said. "Am I able to be open about my disability if this is what they think."
The commission's hearing on Tuesday came as the federal government announced it would release statistics on the number of active coronavirus cases among National Disability Insurance Scheme participants.
Across Australia, there were 129 active cases, including 41 participants and 88 workers, with almost all cases in Victoria.
The inquiry continues.