Natasha Stott Despoja urges Coalition to apply 'gender lens' to pandemic recovery
Our Watch chair and former Australian Democrats leader says federal budget must strengthen women's economic security, which will help reduce the 'shadow pandemic' of violence against women
The Morrison government must apply a "gender lens" when it draws up the next federal budget because the pandemic has disproportionately harmed women, Natasha Stott Despoja has said.
Australia's candidate to the United Nations committee on the elimination of discrimination against women called on the government to look beyond "shovel-ready" stimulus projects and to support female-dominated, low-paid sectors at the frontline of the pandemic response in the budget in October.
On Wednesday Stott Despoja also urged the government to speed up the delivery of its $150m package to support people experiencing domestic and family violence during the pandemic because experts say "there is still huge need".
She described how the pandemic was affecting men and women in different ways during an address to the National Press Club in Canberra on Wednesday in her capacity as the founding chair of Our Watch, a group that campaigns to prevent violence against women and their children in Australia.
In the midst of a devastating pandemic, she said, it was more important than ever to discuss what some have called a "shadow pandemic" – the increase in violence against women and children.
She cited figures from Australian service providers and researchers showing a rise in family violence, including first-time family violence, and coercive behaviour. The pandemic had exacerbated inequalities in the home and in the workforce.
"There is no doubt that stress-related factors in this pandemic, in this current situation, including financial pressures, potential family disruption, social isolation, disruption to people's usual personal and social roles, that can compound and exacerbate the underlying conditions that lead to violence against women," she said.
"While these stress factors can increase the severity and frequency of violence, they do not in themselves cause it, and they certainly don't excuse it … there is no excuse for abuse."
Stott Despoja urged the government to develop pandemic recovery policies that strengthened women's economic security, independence, economic participation and decision-making in public life – all of which could also help reduce violence against women.
At the same time, Stott Despoja warned against the government's plan to reduce the rate of the coronavirus supplement next month, saying it could affect women and children who were escaping domestic violence.
"We need to apply a gender lens and analysis to policy and budget decisions," she said.
"Of course infrastructure and a range of other things are important in order to get this country back on its feet, but [to apply a] gender lens: are we looking at the industries that have been hit hardest? Are we looking at those needed or female-dominated sectors that have proved so valuable to dealing with this pandemic and yet are not being supported?"
Stott Despoja noted that childcare educators – a female-dominated workforce – were the first group to lose access to the jobkeeper wage subsidy.
She said it would provide a boost to economic stimulus if Australia looked at the sectors "in which women are dominant and work out how we can better value them, better recognise them and certainly better remunerate them".
Stott Despoja cautioned against the idea of giving victims of domestic violence early access to their superannuation, saying she was concerned about the long-term impacts and "there's got to be a better way".
"Women fare worse than men on so many counts in our society, whether it's in relation to unpaid caring roles, whether it's job security and opportunities, whether it's the pay gap, or, indeed, retiring with less super anyway," she said.
Stott Despoja also argued against the presumption of shared custody in contested custody cases – something that Graham Perrett, a federal Labor MP, is seeking to unwind through a private member's bill introduced after the murder of Brisbane woman Hannah Clarke and her three children by her former partner six months ago.
Stott Despoja called on legislators to "not only to look at private member's bills, but to do this on a cross-party basis". The former leader of the Australian Democrats pointed to her record in voting against the Howard government's changes enshrining the presumption of shared custody.
"It was one of the most depressing legislative and parliamentary debates of my life," she said. "The policy was not nuanced, it wasn't empathetic, it wasn't based on evidence, it wasn't well-researched and it broke my heart."
Stott Despoja said she would be honoured to serve on the UN committee on the elimination of discrimination against women, but noted she was running against 19 other candidates in an election that has been delayed because of the pandemic.
The Australian government-backed candidate said promoting women in leadership and primary prevention of family violence would be among her priorities if elected.