Daniel Andrews says he will use 'facts' after Morrison claims 'shared' responsibility for aged care Covid failures
Of the more than 2,000 active coronavirus cases in Victoria's aged care sector, only five are in state-run public facilities
Daniel Andrews says only a handful of the active coronavirus cases in aged care are in state government-run facilities, after the prime minister said blame for the outbreak should be shared between state and federal governments.
Scott Morrison said he would not take personal responsibility for the ongoing crisis of the coronavirus outbreak in aged care, saying that although the federal government had responsibility for the aged care sector, public health was a responsibility of the Victorian government.
"Well public health – we regulate aged care, but when there is a public health pandemic, then public health, which, whether it gets into aged care, shopping centres, schools or anywhere else, then they are things that are matters for Victoria," Morrison told ABC News Breakfast on Wednesday.
There are 120 coronavirus outbreaks in aged care homes in Melbourne, of which only six – two located at the same premises – are in state-run public aged care.
Of the 2,050 active cases in aged care in Victoria, only five are in state-run public sector aged care.
The remaining 2,045 cases are in private or not-for-profit run aged care, which is regulated by the federal government.
Andrews told reporters in Melbourne on Wednesday that he had not seen Morrison's comments in full and repeated the line that has become his slogan: "The only attack that matters is our collective attack against this virus."
"I am not seeking to make any other point than the facts … if it's OK by you I'll continue to do that," he said.
"I am having a conversation with the PM later today and I am pretty confident that one thing we won't talk about is a syllable-by-syllable breakdown of the language he uses and the language I use because we just don't have time for that. We just don't have time."
While Andrews was speaking, Morrison told reporters in Sydney, where he was announcing an agreement between the Australian government and Oxford University to access a vaccine the university is developing, that responsibility for managing the aged care outbreak was shared, but stressed that it was due to community transmission – which would come under the state's management of public health.
"We understand our responsibilities and we will be responsible for those, but when have you a community pandemic, the virus will find its way into many places … so it's the overlapping of public health responsibilities, which sit with states, and federal aged care regulation responsibilities [which] sit with the federal government," he said.
"It is a complex set of responsibilities and they are shared and that's why we're working together. I keep stressing – working together, not against each other, is the way we manage these impacts."
Morrison has repeatedly rejected a suggestion heard by the aged care royal commission that the federal government does not have a plan for aged care.
"The plan was in place," he said. "Assertions were made by individuals at the commission, and those assertions have been rejected and we've provided that factual information directly to the commission."
More than two-thirds of the 363 people who have died with Covid-19 in Victoria to date were connected to aged care outbreaks.
A further 12 people – all in aged care homes – died in the 24-hours to Wednesday. Victoria recorded 216 new cases, the lowest since 13 July.
The Victorian chief health officer, Prof. Brett Sutton, said the numbers were "stabilising" both in the community and in aged care sectors. The number of people in hospital and in intensive care has also stabilised.
However the number of tests is also down, with just over 16,000 conducted on Tuesday. More than 2m coronavirus tests have been conducted in Victoria since the pandemic began.
The Victorian government has again delayed the release of detailed data on how Covid-19 has been contracted and spread by healthcare workers.
Frankston Hospital is dealing with an outbreak in which 50 patients and hospital staff have tested positive.
Sutton said there had been a "significant opportunity for transmission" at the hospital "so we do need to bear in mind that there will be an increase in furloughed staff".