Sydney security guard contracts Covid, prompting call to replace guards with nurses at quarantine hotels
Hotel quarantine will pose a coronavirus outbreak risk as long as the virus thrives overseas, experts warn
A hotel security guard in Sydney has contracted Covid-19 from a returned traveller in quarantine and infection control experts say that as long as the virus rages overseas "hotel quarantine will remain a source of risk of further outbreaks".
It has been suggested that security guards at hotels should now be paired with, or replaced by, trained nurses.
The New South Wales chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, announced on Tuesday that a guard who worked at the Sydney Harbour Marriott hotel in Circular Quay had "most likely" contracted the virus from a traveller from the US, and subsequently worked at a court building and a market in western Sydney while infectious.
Chant said genomic sequencing showed the strain of the virus the guard had acquired matched the traveller in quarantine. It was different from the clusters in Sydney, including the Crossroads hotel, which have been linked to Melbourne's second wave.
The guard worked at the Marriott hotel in early August and subsequently worked at Parramatta local court and Flemington market.
"They were the times when the person was infectious," Chant said.
NSW Health is now warning people who were at the Flemington market on Sunday 9 August from 8am to 4pm, or at the Parramatta court on Tuesday 11 August or Wednesday 12 August from 8.30am to 12.30pm, to monitor for symptoms and get tested if any develop.
Chant said the guard, who was a security contractor, did not work while infectious at the Marriott hotel. He developed symptoms on 11 August.
NSW police assistant commissioner Leanne McCusker, when asked why the guard had worked across so many different locations, said that was a matter for his private employer.
Prof Mary-Louise McLaws, an infection prevention expert from the University of New South Wales, said the case showed the difficulty of quarantining returned travellers in hotels.
"That is a built environment for a hotel, not for an infectious disease," she said.
"Security guards are not healthcare workers and they might not be fully appreciative of any slight breach in infection control that could place themselves at risk – and the wider community. They need to have very specific training, and not just online training."
McLaws said there were potential parallels between NSW and Victoria, where breaches in hotel quarantine led to thousands of cases in the state.
"There is always the potential for a similar spread if the authorities don't find out about the infection of a security guard rapidly and remove them from household contacts. Often security guards live in shared housing, they share lifts to work and they also may share meeting rooms and lunchrooms without their masks on."
Prof Raina MacIntyre, also from UNSW, said hotel quarantine would "continue to pose a risk" as long as the virus was still "raging overseas".
"Every time we bring Covid under control, hotel quarantine will remain a source of risk of further outbreaks," she said on Tuesday.
Australia's acting chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, when asked about Victoria's hotel quarantine arrangements in early July, said "appropriate people" had to be trained properly "to really reinforce the issues around infection control".
According to Chant, the traveller in question was tested for Covid-19 on 2 August and a positive test was returned on 4 August. They were then transferred to a health hotel for people with Covid-19.
She said the guard told NSW Health he had "no recollection of coming in contact with any guests". She said it was possible "there may have been an intermediary who got infected".
McCusker said NSW police had launched an investigation and were looking at CCTV footage to see how the guard contracted the virus.
McLaws said it was possible the guard could have contracted the virus through his eyes – as most security staff do not wear eye protection – or through poor ventilation.
She said the government should consider replacing security guards with trained health professionals or pairing them with nurses.
"It is now time for security guards to wear a shield to protect their eyes and to potentially increase the environmental cleaning," she said.
"If they replace them with nursing staff, that is potentially replacing them with the correct group. Nurses are not trained to be security officers but they are trained in infection prevention and control.
"It is difficult for one staff member to be trained in both to the level that is needed. Potentially a nurse needs to accompany a guard in all cases. But that won't protect their eyes or prevent opportunistic airborne spread that happens when you have low airflow changes."
NSW has used 2,500 police guards in hotel quarantine and 2,000 private security guards to date.
McCusker was asked what roles security guards play in hotel security. She said they "maintain security around the various floors". She did not disclose what company the guard worked for.
The assistant commissioner added that police "ensure" strict safety is observed at NSW hotels.
"In terms of the police and the security guard, can I say that we have strong and robust safety protocols in place," McCusker said. "All police and security guard prior to deployment are part of a safety briefing.
"The PPE equipment is worn appropriately, in particular, when close contact is taking place, and police continue to ensure safety observations and strict safety protocols at these locations."
McCusker said that all the police who worked at the Marriott hotel at the same time had been tested for Covid-19 and so far tested negative. All the security guards who worked with the positive worker have been tested and over half had received negatives results so far.
NSW Labor's health spokesman, Ryan Park, called on the health minister, Brad Hazzard, to "urgently outline what steps are being taken to ensure hotel quarantine is robust and working properly".
"Is he increasing PPE supplies or staff training to ensure the safety of those in quarantine, those working in quarantine and the wider community?" Park asked.
"If there is a risk of exposure, should we be employing these guards full-time so we can prevent community transmission?"