Hotel quarantine linked to 99% of Victoria's Covid cases, inquiry told
Dr Charles Alpren confirms more than 90% of cases since the end of May are linked to Rydges and almost all the others to Stamford Plaza
The vast majority of the cases of Covid-19 in Victoria can be traced back to a single family that returned to Australia in mid-May who were kept in hotel quarantine at the Rydges Hotel, an inquiry has heard.
The Australian Defence Force has also confirmed that an offer of personnel for hotel quarantine was specifically made to all states and territories.
Dr Charles Alpren, an epidemiologist with the Victorian Department of Health and Human Services, confirmed to the hotel quarantine inquiry over 90% of cases since the end of May could be linked to the one outbreak at the Rydges Hotel, while almost all of the other cases could be linked to an outbreak at the Stamford Plaza Hotel.
The family of four returned to Australia on 9 May, and all four were symptomatic and were diagnosed with Covid-19 on 15 May. On that date they were moved to the Rydges Hotel on Swanston Street in Melbourne.
Then on 25 May, three staff working at the hotel tested positive for Covid-19. From there, the number of cases linked to the outbreak grew to 17. Alpren said 14 of those 17 that were genomically sequenced were linked to the family.
Alpren said that based on the data obtained by the department from 3,234 of the over 12,000 cases in the past month, 3,183 are linked to the Rydges Hotel cluster.
For the 1,589 cases sequenced from cases with symptom onset in the past month, Alpren said all but 12 were linked to Rydges.
The remaining 12 were linked to a cluster at the Stamford Plaza Hotel, where 46 cases were connected to a man who tested positive after returning to Australia on 1 June, or a couple who tested positive after arriving in Australia in mid-June.
Although there had been two other cases that weren't linked to either outbreak, Alpren said he was "satisfied to conclude" that 99% of current cases of Covid-19 in Victoria had arisen from the Rydges or Stamford Plaza hotels used for hotel quarantine.
"However, I cannot be very precise in the number or proportion to have arisen from each outbreak separately," he said. "It is likely that the large majority, I said in my statement approximately 90% or more, of Covid-19 infections in Victoria can be traced to the Rydges Hotel."
Alpren was pushed to explain if the three staff members who initially tested positive at the Rydges were internal Rydges staff or government contractors. Lawyers acting for DHHS objected to the question because it would be against the public interest in maintaining the confidentiality of the individuals involved.
Head of the inquiry, Jennifer Coate, referred back to Alpren's statement that the precise mechanism of their employment isn't really something that the epidemiological investigators need to know, aside from the detail that they worked in the hotel quarantine program.
When asked about the state's system for contact tracing, and whether people were following the rules when testing positive, Alpren admitted that while the vast majority of people did isolate after they were told to, some people had competing priorities with need to provide food and care.
"I should really stress that I feel that people are very, very happy to try to engage in behaviours that limit the transmission of the disease – people do not want to spread disease to others but certainly they can have competing competing priorities, [whether that] be a financial [need] or they need to make sure that food is available for them and their families, and their families are cared for," he said.
The commander of the ADF's Covid taskforce, Lieutenant General John Frewen, told the Covid-19 response Senate select committee that after the 27 March announcement from the prime minister of defence support for hotel quarantine, the ADF made sure 100 personnel were on standby in the larger states, including Victoria, and 50 were on standby in the smaller states, if the states requested assistance.
He said "that offer was made specifically around mandatory quarantine".
The Victorian emergency management commissioner, Andrew Crisp, released a statement last week stating that while the ADF had been involved in planning and coordination meetings on 27 and 28 March, there was no offer for assistance in hotel quarantine, nor did he seek it.
In New South Wales and Queensland where ADF support was used for hotel quarantine, Frewen said, among general concierge work, the ADF supported police inside the hotel to ensure people were not sneaking out.
Frewen also confirmed that in mid-June, Victoria requested 850 personnel, only to cancel the request the following day. He said he was unaware of why Victoria had cancelled the request.
There are now 3,459 ADF personnel assisting with Covid responses in states and territories around Australia, with the majority in Victoria.
Victoria has made 14 requests for ADF assistance. Eleven were accepted, two were withdrawn and one request for support on aerial surveillance made by the Victorian government was rejected by the ADF.
Frewen said the reason it was knocked back was "we didn't think it was the right thing for us to be supporting".
The committee heard that since 27 July, the ADF had provided support in four aged care facilities, and was still providing support in two of those.
On Monday, the hotel quarantine inquiry heard evidence of "misleading" and "inappropriate" advice and training given to security guards working in hotel quarantine, including advice that personal protective equipment was not needed when escorting guests out for fresh air or exercise.