Emboldened Liberal MPs increase pressure to kill super guarantee rise to 12%
Signs Liberals increasingly support freezing guarantee at 9.5% because of Covid-19 recession, even though rise is already legislated
Liberal MPs have stepped up calls for the superannuation guarantee to remain frozen at 9.5% after the assistant minister, Jane Hume, said she was "ambivalent" about an already legislated rise to 12%.
The Liberal senator Andrew Bragg told Guardian Australia the "first recession" since compulsory superannuation started in 1992 was "not a good time to increase the cost of private employment".
The comments follow Scott Morrison's concession on Friday that the Covid-19 recession was a "rather significant event" that could cause the government to reconsider its election promise to leave super increases in place, which has prompted fury from unions and Labor.
Hume suggested it would be "very difficult to unwind" already legislated increases but pointed to a growing coalition including the Reserve Bank, Australian Council of Social Service and Grattan Institute warning the increase could come at the cost of wage rises.
On Monday, Hume said "the legislation is already there, it's already set to rise".
"I'm reasonably ambivalent on the issue, to tell you the truth," she told ABC radio. "I think this is a decision that really should be based on the circumstances at the time."
Bragg argued the need to make changes to super had become "more acute" than 12 months ago, because the government wanted to support economic recovery during the Covid-19 recession but "the fundamental question hasn't changed".
Bragg said compulsory superannuation was "sadly not on track to deliver on its objectives" because it "doesn't get people off the pension" and costs the budget more than it saves.
Bragg called for voluntary superannuation for low income Australians in his first Senate speech in July 2019, and has since proposed a raft of changes, including consideration of widening the first home saver scheme to allow super to be used to save for a home deposit.
Backbench MPs have become increasingly vocal in calls to change super, as the government also considers how to respond to Treasury's retirement income review.
On Monday the house economics committee chair, Tim Wilson, congratulated Hume for her comments and claimed that the Reserve Bank governor, Phil Lowe, "drew a correlation to increasing the [super guarantee] and a potential impact on jobs growth".
"Right now Australians need their own money, and we need wages to stimulate demand and jobs to help unemployed Aussies," he said on Twitter.
Industry Super Australia has accused Coalition MPs of verballing Lowe, after he told the committee on Friday he did not know if super increases would harm employment, but they "would certainly have a negative effect on wages growth".
"There will be less current income," Lowe said. "If there's less income there may be less spending, and if there's less spending there may be fewer jobs.
"That's a whole sequence of chains that have to work out, but it's certainly possible."
The president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Michele O'Neil, accused the government of being "completely out of touch" for the "extraordinary" refusal to back superannuation increases.
According to the ACTU, freezing super at 9.5% could cost a 30-year old nurse $121,000 by retirement, and $60,000 for a 30-year old cleaner.
Labor's shadow assistant treasurer, Stephen Jones, told reporters in Canberra superannuation was "providing more dignity, more security in retirement for older Australians" while creating a pool of savings to invest in Australia and help economic recovery.
Jones said Hume's ambivalence was "nothing short of outrageous" and demanded the government release the retirement income review.
Jones labelled the argument that super would hurt wages "superficially attractive" but said it was "simply not true" because it applied only to workers covered by enterprise agreements, not the 70% of the workforce on awards, government employees and the self-employed.
"Yes, we admit there is a relationship but let's not buy this argument that workers are not going to get a wage increase if we freeze superannuation.
"It's simply not true and Jane Hume herself admitted this this morning, when she said 'yes if we do this we hope things will improve but we can't guarantee it'."
Any plan to unwind the legislated increases, set to begin in July 2021, would need crossbench Senate support.
On Monday the newly-independent senator Rex Patrick told Guardian Australia he would oppose any bid to reverse legislated rises to 12% super.
But Patrick left open the possibility of supporting a delay if the government could demonstrate the asserted impact on business, wages and jobs.
Labor and the government are also locked in a tit-for-tat over allowing workers hit by the Covid-19 recession to withdraw up to $20,000 from their retirement savings.
Analysis from AlphaBeta based on anonymised bank data, released on Monday, suggested nearly 40% of people who withdrew from their super during the pandemic had not experienced a decline in income, despite the scheme requiring a downturn of 20%. The research found two-thirds of the money was spent on non-essentials.
Hume questioned the accuracy of the data, saying it did not accord with information from the Australian Tax Office.
On Friday, ATO second commissioner Jeremy Hirschhorn told the Covid-19 committee he was "very comforted" by the ATO's compliance checks, which found at least 90% of claimants were "clearly eligible" for the scheme.