Victoria's hotel quarantine inquiry to examine genomic testing in hunt for 'patient zero'
Security companies and return travellers may also be called to give evidence at judicial inquiry this week
The judicial inquiry into Victoria's hotel quarantine program will on Monday examine evidence from the Melbourne health institute whose genomic testing could shed more light on the source and spread of the state's second wave.
The inquiry, called by the Victorian government after "unacceptable infection control breaches in hotel quarantine" and chaired by Jennifer Coate, confirmed on Sunday it had added an extra two days of hearings to its schedule for the week.
It means that security companies and return travellers subject to the $80m hotel quarantine program could be expected to give evidence on Thursday and Friday as part of hearings set to probe the experiences of "being in hotel quarantine and working in the hotel quarantine program".
Two public health experts will give evidence on Monday: Professor Ben Howden of the Doherty Institute, and Professor Lindsay Grayson of Austin Health and Melbourne University.
The Doherty Institute is responsible for genomic testing that the premier, Daniel Andrews, and the Victorian chief health officer, Brett Sutton, have referenced in their public comments on the spread of the virus from out of hotel quarantine.
Sutton has said it is this research that suggests a significant proportion – if not all – of the second-wave infections may have originated from hotel quarantine. Andrews said in June that the same work had traced a number of cases from hotel quarantine to Melbourne's northern suburbs.
However, Andrews and Sutton have declined to release the genomic testing, citing the Doherty Institute's ownership of the research.
On Tuesday, Dr Charles Alpren, an epidemiologist at the Department of Health and Human Services, will face questions about state authorities' infection control, contact tracing and epidemiological work.
The appearance of security companies before the inquiry is highly anticipated given the Victorian government's decision to rely on private security guards has been a major point of contention.
In July, Andrews said he accepted there had been "unacceptable infection control breaches in hotel quarantine" but he has otherwise broadly deflected questions on the topic, arguing the inquiry has been set up to establish who was responsible for that decision and to evaluate the consequences of the move.
It prompted an extraordinary intervention earlier this month from Coate, who said the inquiry's work did not prohibit political leaders or other officials from speaking publicly about the hotel quarantine program.
Some media reports have carried unsourced rumours suggesting that a key factor in the spread of the virus from outside the hotel quarantine program was an alleged breach where a security guard had sex with a return traveller.
The claim has never been proven and a report in the Age on Friday suggested that despite claims to the contrary, the first person to test positive at the Rydges Hotel was a hotel manager, not a security guard.
Andrews said on Friday he did not know who the so-called "patient zero" of the Rydges outbreak was.
"I think that whole notion that we could necessarily have, to that degree of certainty, clarity about one particular person, I don't know the science would ever lead you to that. It could, but it may not," he said.
A full witness list for this week's hearings, which were pushed back due to stage four restrictions, is yet to be released.