Melbourne hotel quarantine jobs advertised on casual staffing app Sidekicker
Ads posted this week despite casual subcontracting being identified as possibly contributing to Covid-19 spread
Crucial roles assisting returned travellers and security staff in Melbourne hotel quarantine have been advertised on casual and temporary staffing app Sidekicker, despite subcontracting of casual workers being identified as an issue that might have contributed to the outbreak in hotels and the second wave of coronavirus in Victoria.
The inquiry setup to examine errors with hotel quarantine,which may be responsible for every single currently active case of coronavirus in the state, will examine the decisions made around the use of contractors, including the suitability of the service providers and the people overseeing contractors.
Guardian Australia has learned that as recently as this week, Spotless Group was recruiting on the Sidekicker app for casual customer service liaison officers to work under the direction of the Department of Health and Human Services, Alfred Health and Spotless.
The roles, to run between 3 August to 30 October, include escorting guests around the hotel and to exercise, assisting with luggage, delivering Uber Eats orders and care packages, ensuring social distancing in public areas, ensuring the maintenance of infection prevention standards, and preventing staff from talking to the media.
The job offered rates higher than award rates, and Spotless has said in the ad that successful applicants would be provided with infection control training.
When Melbourne went back into stage 3 lockdown earlier this month, the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, suspended the returned travellers program for an initial two weeks while new protocols were put in place with the justice department. The advertisement appears to be aimed at finding staff when the program is reintroduced.
The justice department was advertising directly for casual staff earlier this month.
The Victorian justice department did not provide a direct response to questions about the job ad, but said in a statement that the department "is strengthening operational procedures and safety measures to embed stringent quality and infection control, after assuming responsibility for the Victorian government's mandatory quarantine program."
A spokeswoman for Spotless said the company had received over 600 applications in just three hours for the roles, and a rigorous process was in place to ensure the correct candidate was chosen, including shortlisting, multiple interviews, and police and reference checks.
"Should these requirements be satisfactorily met, the successful candidates undertake a two-step induction process, including an online and in-person training covering communicable diseases, correct use and disposal of PPE, etc," she said.
"Candidates who pass this induction and training process are then assigned to a specified site where they undertake site orientation."
While security staff have borne much of the initial blame for the second wave of coronavirus cases, a healthcare worker who was a returned traveller from a cruise ship and who arrived in hotel quarantine at Rydges hotel on Swanston in April told a Victorian parliamentary inquiry into Covid-19 that hotel cleaning protocols were a concern.
"The room was dirty," Christine Cocks said in her submission published this week.
"Quite a few in our cohort asked for a vacuum cleaner. … Of concern to us was how the vacuum cleaner was transferred from room to room. I do not think it was cleaned between transfers.
"A fair percentage of our cohort had tested Covid positive."
She said while waste was double-bagged in her room, it was not again bagged once it left the room, meaning it could have been contaminated on the outside of the bag.
"I think it is unfair to just point a finger at the security staff at the hotel (and yes, we did see [eight] staff come in only [two] cars for their shifts) because, to us, the most likely weakness was how potential contaminants were managed by the hotel.
"Quarantine should only be managed by people well-trained in handling of contaminants."