Queensland records new coronavirus case with possible aged care link
Bellbird Park man is a relative of two people – one of whom works in aged care – who dined at Madtongsan Korean restaurant in Sunnybank
A Queensland aged care facility has been forced to activate its Covid-safe plan after it was revealed that a staff member may have been the direct source of the state's latest confirmed case.
Queensland recorded only one new coronavirus case on Friday morning, as recriminations continued over two women who returned to Queensland from Melbourne, failed to self-isolate and then tested positive for Covid-19.
But the new case, a 27-year-old man from Bellbird Park, is a relative of two people – one of whom works in aged care – who dined at a Korean restaurant on the same night as one of the women.
One or both of the relatives was considered to be the most likely source of his infection, Queensland's chief health officer, Jeanette Young, said.
"We know one of his relatives who may be the source of the infection works at the Bolton Clarke aged care facility in Pinjarra Hills," Young said. She described it as a "very good facility" with "very good Covid-safe plans" that they put into place on Friday morning.
The two relatives had entered quarantine after being identified as close contacts of the earlier case, but their test results had not yet come through.
The 27-year-old man was tested after developing systems, before he knew his relatives were close contacts of the first case.
The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, urged anyone who went to the Madtongsan Korean restaurant in Sunnybank on 23 July to be tested if they had any concern or any symptoms.
The health minister, Steven Miles, said the possible connection to the women who returned from Melbourne underscored the importance of contact tracing and restaurants' record-keeping. More than 1,500 contacts had now been traced relating to the two women, and the sister of one of them, who tested positive to Covid-19. Contact tracing would now begin for the new case.
Palaszczuk urged Queenslanders to "really think about social distancing" over the weekend.
Queensland conducted a record 9,076 tests on Thursday, Miles said.
There are currently 11 active cases in Queensland, with five people in hospital.
Diana Lasu, 21, Olivia Muranga, 19, and a 21-year-old Algester woman will appear in Brisbane magistrates' court on 28 September on charges of providing false information and fraud.
Queensland's borders close to anyone from greater Sydney from 1am on Saturday, and Palaszczuk warned there would be delays at the border.