'Everybody is very worried': testing times for residents of Sydney's Covid-19 hotspots
Wary locals are aware of Victoria's deadly second wave of coronavirus and fear NSW could be heading down the same path
At the Cruising Yacht Club of Australia, down by the water, next to the trophies that say "World sailing youth match racing world championship" and "Sydney-Hobart yacht race record breaker", there is a sign. It is roughly laminated, and attached with black gaffer tape, and has been up since Tuesday.
Joggers scoot past, looking for the entrance to the park, and dog-walkers drag their pets along. "Earlier today, the CYCA was advised an active member of the club and his partner had tested positive for Covid-19," it says. The line for testing starts a few doors down.
On a day when Victoria reported a record 723 new cases and 13 deaths, residents of Sydney's slowly growing hotspots are wary, and being urged to test at the first sign of a sniffle.
Rushcutter's Bay Park, by the football fields and sailboats, is the latest pop-up testing clinic to open in Sydney's east.
The nearby suburb of Potts Point has been declared a hotspot, and NSW Health has told all residents – or anyone who has visited the area in the past two weeks – to get tested if they show any symptoms.
There are 11 cases linked to the suburb, with four more announced on Thursday linked to the Apollo restaurant. Two diners, who were previously diagnosed on Tuesday, visited the Apollo on 22 July, and then the Cruising Yacht Club later – sparking its closure.
Opposite Kings Cross station, local resident Rachel has just been tested for the first time. The Kings Cross library, temporarily closed, has been refashioned into a pop-up testing clinic. A security guard stands outside, squeezing out dollops of hand sanitiser. Inside its glass-fronted doors, four or five people sit patiently.
"I live in Potts Point so I sort of figure it's a good thing to do," Rachel tells Guardian Australia. "I teach pilates and yoga and that sort of stuff, and I figured, I'm potentially in contact with a lot of people."
At lunchtime on Thursday, the clinic is relatively quiet, and there is no line.
"I think it's pretty amazing," Rachel says. "I didn't have to wait long, I was probably in there about 15 minutes all up. That's a really extraordinary result that they managed to get so many different centres open so quickly. I walked about 200 metres to get there, the other one is 400 metres away."
She says the suburb has changed since it was declared a hotspot.
"I taught in Balmain yesterday and I drove back through, it would have been about 3pm, and it definitely felt like there were fewer people in the street. When I was in Harris Farm yesterday I felt like everyone was wearing a mask, except for me."
The testing experience was "as fun as having somebody shove something up your nose can be", she says. After, they gave her a mask and handed her three pages, double-sided, containing stern warnings.
"Basically I have got to isolate until I get my results," she says. "I can't have visitors, I can go into my own garden but not others, that sort of stuff. They were really respectful and informative."
Down at Rushcutters Bay, another local resident, who declined to give her name, is walking her dogs – two pomeranians – when she pauses to read the sign.
She tells Guardian Australia she was also here yesterday, the day the pop-up clinic first opened, to get tested.
"I live in Darling Point," she says. "I do go to the yacht club, and I had been here around the time that they found out that the vice-commodore was infected by the virus. But I worked it out, it was a couple of days before. But as I have had a slight sore throat, and a runny nose and a cough, I thought let's get tested.
"It was very busy. So many nurses and security guards and doctors down there. There was a long queue."
Beyond her, a line of more than 20 people snakes down the street, outside the entrance to the d'Albora Marina. They stand outside stores selling boating supplies and sunhats. A sign facing them advertises "Roni rigging and racing".
The resident says she will know her results in two or three days, and she has been isolating. "[They said] you can exercise outside but don't go anywhere else. I've only taken them [the dogs] to the park for half an hour and I'm back home.
"I think everybody is very concerned about it. Because we thought, you know, there are lots of hotspots in the east, but we weren't expecting it in this area. Darling Point! But yeah, everybody is very worried like we are all over the world."
In Potts Point, Rachel says she feels the pandemic is taking its toll.
"Given there seem to be so many cases cropping up, everything that is happening in Queensland as well, I guess what is concerning is, how long can we keep doing this for?
"I think we are all kind of worn down, financially and emotionally. It's not like I'm going out a lot, but I am not as worried as I was the first time around, but I probably should be more worried."
Back at the yacht club, the Darling Point resident, when asked about the day's record new cases in Victoria, shakes her head. "I think we will be [the same]," she says. "I think it will happen."