Naming Brisbane women risks 'a second wave of Covid-related racial hostility': commission
Others who have breached restrictions have not been identified and doing so creates 'potential for harm', human rights commissioner says
The Queensland Human Rights Commission has been contacted by members of Brisbane's African migrant communities who say they have experienced a backlash to media stories naming and shaming young women accused of breaching coronavirus restrictions.
Multiple media outlets – including the ABC, Courier Mail, Herald Sun, Sydney Morning Herald, the Age, Brisbane Times, Daily Mail and commercial television outlets – named two of the women and published photographs taken from their social media accounts.
Thursday's front page headline of the Courier Mail, Brisbane's only daily newspaper, called them "Enemies of the State".
Three women – the two named in media reports and another, who returned with them from interstate but has not contracted the virus – have been charged by Queensland police with providing false and misleading documents and fraud. The latter charge carries a potential prison term of five years.
The Queensland human rights commissioner, Scott McDougall, on Thursday released a statement expressing concern about the widespread publication of their personal details.
"Other Queenslanders and people from interstate caught breaching restrictions have not been publicly identified, even when their activities have led to infections or outbreaks – including the Noosa birthday party cluster and many other similar situations," McDougall said.
"Similarly, the guards allegedly at the centre of Melbourne's second wave of infections (still recording record daily increases and multiple fatalities) have not been publicly named or had their photographs released, nor have those working in aged care facilities and meatworks where clusters have now appeared.
"The right to privacy should apply equally to everyone."
McDougall said the commission had already been contacted by concerned members of Brisbane's African community.
"Some members of the community are already reporting abusive text messages and social media harassment, others are worried about their children being harassed or abused on their way to and from school," he said.
"Already we have seen comments to 'deport them', 'send them back to where they come from', and worse, alongside appallingly hyperbolic coverage from some media outlets branding them with terms usually reserved for people accused of treason and other high-level crimes.
"Pictures of their homes have allegedly been posted to local residents' groups on social media."
The public humiliation unleashed a torrent of abuse against the women on social media, much of it racially based, some of it sexist, including comments which ridiculed their appearance.
A spokeswoman for Queensland police said the identity of the women was not officially disclosed to the media.
"QPS did not release the names to Courier Mail or any other outlet," she said. "As per our normal practices, police media never confirm a name while an investigation is under way."
The editor of the Courier Mail, Chris Jones, said people who were unknowingly exposed to a virus that kills had the right to know.
"This is a very real, serious public health issue," Jones said. "And people have the right to know if their life has been unwittingly jeopardised."
Australia's acting chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, criticised the publication of the identities of the women, saying he wasn't "in favour of naming and shaming". "That's unfortunate, that that's happened," he said.
McDougall said identifying the women did nothing to help curb a potential outbreak or to bring the community together to help do that.
"It does, however, create the potential for harm," he said.
"I understand that people are frustrated and angry and fearful of another wave of infections. We can be angry at individuals for disregarding the rules, for being dishonest or reckless or putting other people at risk.
"But we cannot allow this to create a second wave of Covid-related racial hostility. The [alleged] actions of just two people cannot and should not be used as an excuse to harass or abuse an entire community – the vast majority of which has, like the rest of Queensland, tried to comply with the rules."
The commissioner said the young women would face the consequences for allegedly breaching restrictions.
"But we saw the media commentary blaming migrant communities in part for the second wave of outbreaks in Victoria. We do not want or need a similar commentary here," he said.
"We need to take care of ourselves and each other and prioritise the safety of our communities. We are stronger together."