Australian tax office moves to track down people who withdrew super inappropriately
ATO official tells the Senate Covid-19 inquiry workers ineligible to access their superannuation could be taxed or fined
The Australian Taxation Office has launched a pilot program to track down workers it believes may have been ineligible to withdraw up to $20,000 in retirement savings from their superannuation.
ATO officials told the Senate Covid-19 inquiry on Thursday that those who inappropriately accessed super could be taxed on withdrawals or face penalties of up to $12,600 for misleading statements.
Officials also sought to calm fears over a program to claw back jobkeeper wage subsidies from 8,000 businesses, revealing most had been cut off but would not be further punished for "honest mistakes".
Scott Morrison defended the early superannuation release program, saying the government "doesn't give people lectures about how they should spend their money" after reports many workers were saving the withdrawn super or paying down mortgages with it.
Treasury officials told the committee $32bn of superannuation had been released to 2.46 million people, expected to grow to $42bn by December – $13bn more than first forecast in March.
Workers were eligible to withdraw $10,000 in the 2019-20 financial year and again in 2020-21 if, on their own assessment, they were "adversely financially affected by Covid-19".
Jeremy Hirschhorn, the ATO's second commissioner of client engagement, told the inquiry that self-assessment "relies on the assumption most Australians are honest" but after the withdrawals, information such as single-touch payroll data had suggested some workers "did not meet the criteria".
The ATO has written to hundreds of people it does not believe are eligible under a pilot program to "work out the level of ineligibility" and design a compliance program.
"We will not be forcing people to put money back in their superannuation," Hirschhorn said.
The ATO would consider a "range of possible outcomes" – from taking no action where workers "voluntarily disclose" that they had withdrawn funds due to an "honest mistake" about their eligibility, up to imposing penalties of $12,600 for misleading statements.
The ATO can also withdraw a declaration that funds are tax-free, forcing those who inappropriately accessed super to pay tax at their marginal rate. No fines or decisions forcing tax to be paid on withdrawals have been made at this stage.
The ATO had no plans to check eligibility before releasing super, because it was not possible to get the information to assess applications quickly, Hirschhorn said.
Labor's shadow assistant treasurer, Stephen Jones, said the $13bn blowout in the program "will cost taxpayers and retirees" because some 560,000 superannuation accounts had now been cleaned out to a zero balance.
He said a 25-year-old worker could lose "as much as $100,000 in retirement income" and argued people "should be supported so that they don't have to make this difficult choice" of accessing their retirement savings.
Morrison told reporters in Canberra the program's rules stipulated money was only available "in cases of hardship" – a concept already built into the super system – but expanded "given the hardship people are facing" in the pandemic.
Morrison said the "overwhelming majority" of people had used it to "restructure their personal balance sheets" such as paying down mortgages, which is a "good opportunity" to decrease risk and improve financial resilience.
"So no, I don't have those concerns, but I think it is very important to note, we are not a government that tells people how they should spend their own money," he said.
Hirschhorn said the ATO had detected fraud from third parties accessing a worker's super in "hundreds" of instances across the scheme, or about one in 5,000 applicants.
Hirschhorn said levels of fraud in the jobkeeper program were "very low", but six cases had been referred from the serious financial crime taskforce, chaired by the tax office, to the police.
Officials said these related to cases of "conscious, deliberate behaviour" such as pretending to have employees not employed by the business, "blatant manipulation of turnover" and a person who had claimed $1,500 fortnightly subsidies from five related businesses.
In July Guardian Australia reported that 8,000 businesses had received correspondence from the ATO questioning the basis for accessing the jobkeeper scheme and warning they might have to pay back wage subsidies.
Hirschhorn revealed about half those businesses had not responded to requests for further information, and a further 2,000 were found to be ineligible – both of which resulted in them being cut off from the program, with no further subsidies paid.
Hirschhorn said businesses that made "honest mistakes" that met "a couple but not all eligibility tests" would not face further penalties, but the ATO had asked for jobkeeper wage subsidies to be returned from an unspecified number.
Those 8,000 businesses have claimed less than $100m between them. Hirschhorn took on notice how much the ATO had asked to be paid back.