NSW reports 18 new cases as traces of Covid-19 in sewage puts Perisher snowfields on high alert
Nine Sydney areas have been placed on the coronavirus watchlist and several daycare centres and schools have been closed
The nation's acting chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, has said he has "a lot of confidence" NSW can stay on top of the coronavirus clusters expanding across Sydney, despite a growing list of areas being placed on a Covid-19 watchlist.
NSW reported 18 new cases on Thursday including six which were yet to be linked to known clusters.
The latest results have forced several daycare centres and schools across Sydney to close and Woolworths announced on Thursday afternoon it would strongly encourage customers in NSW and the ACT to wear face masks at its stores from Monday.
The Woolworths policy, which will also apply to hotspots in Queensland from Friday and is not compulsory, came hours after NSW Health issued a call for residents in nine specific areas to be on high alert for symptoms.
The areas placed on the watch list are predominantly in Sydney: stretching from Potts Point in Sydney's east to suburbs in the west including Prestons, Cabramatta and Bonnyrigg.
On Thursday night, NSW Health also added new eateries to a growing list of venues that are linked to Covid-19. The venues – Harpoon and Hotel Harry in Surry Hills, Tan Viet in Cabramatta and Matinee Coffee in Marrickville – were visited by a positive case and customers have been urged to self-isolate if they meet certain criteria.
Perisher has also been added after Covid-19 was detected in wastewater analysis conducted across the state on 22 July. NSW Health said in a statement further analysis was needed to determine how significant the result was.
The department noted the virus particles could have come from someone who was previously ill.
"The positive sewage result can be due to shedding of the virus by someone who may have previously had the illness with the virus 'shedding' through their system for up to four weeks," NSW Health said.
"While no cases of Covid-19 have been identified in Perisher or Thredbo to date, it's important that anyone who was in this area gets tested if they have even the mildest of symptoms."
There have been 105 cases reported in NSW this week. The six new cases yet to be linked to an existing cluster will raise concerns among health officials, who have previously been pleased by the ability of contact tracers to keep the outbreak in check.
The nation's acting chief medical officer said on Thursday he was "confident" there would be more information about "how those transmission chains have worked" by Friday. Kelly pointed to the fact that the initial Crossroads hotel cluster in south-west Sydney had been traced "very quickly".
"I have a lot of confidence in the NSW system," Kelly said. "But we need to be clear – with 5,000 active cases right now in Victoria that's an issue for all of us."
The cases in Potts Point also led to the closure of a Fitness First gym in St Leonards on Thursday after it was confirmed that a positive case linked to the Apollo restaurant had attended on the morning of 27 July.
In addition to the 18 new cases, NSW has also recorded its first case of Covid-19 linked to its prison population, when a man who was arrested on an outstanding parole warrant tested positive after arriving on a flight from Victoria.
At a press conference, the commissioner of New South Wales jails, Peter Severin, said contact tracing was still under way but no staff were currently isolating.
"Because of the fact he came from Melbourne he was always treated at all times as a person who needed to be isolated [and] treated as if the person was positive," Severin said.
"We obviously are doing some very careful contact tracing. While people were wearing PPE nevertheless it is incumbent on us to do that.
"In terms of our staff, we're obviously going to have a look at who was in contact with him and then we follow the protocol of self-isolation [and] testing. I can't talk for what actually happened at the airport … but I understand from reports that I've got from police that at all times the staff were wearing all the PPE that they wear for any flight coming from Melbourne."
Severin said the inmate, who was not displaying symptoms, was being held in isolation.
Also on Thursday, NSW Health revealed several childcare centres and schools had closed after positive cases. Students at both Mary Immaculate Catholic Primary School in Bossley Park and Freeman Catholic College in Bonnyrigg tested positive for Covid-19 while Fort Street High School in Petersham has also been closed due to a possible case.
"The person concerned is being tested and the results will be confirmed today," NSW Health said.
The Everlearn Childcare Centre in Prestons has also closed after a child attended "while they may have been infectious".
Besides the six new cases still under investigation, two are returned travellers in hotel quarantine and the rest are linked to existing clusters.
There are now 89 cases associated with the Thai Rock restaurant in Wetherill Park, 57 cases associated with the Crossroads Hotel cluster, eight cases associated with the Batemans Bay Soldiers Club, and 20 associated with funerals in the city's west. There are 11 cases associated with the Potts Point cluster.