'He makes it so much nicer': Brett Sutton the 'silver fox lining' of Victoria's second-wave lockdown
The chief health officer is seen as a ray of hope by his growing fan club during Melbourne's dark days of Covid-19
Cross-stitch and Yoga With Adriene? So last lockdown.
Victorians enduring a second lockdown have a new hobby: expressing their devotion to the state's chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton.
For some, that means purchasing a blanket bearing Sutton's face (or a pillow, tote bag, or mask).
For others, it's sharing a photo of a 22-year-old Sutton with flowing locks, creating stan accounts, or simply tweeting admiringly.
For Melburnians enduring the uncertainty and grief – but also the boredom – of a second-wave lockdown while the rest of the country slowly opens up, the public health and tropical medicine expert has become a soothing fixture and voice of authority.
There he is by premier Daniel Andrews' side, with his trademark undone top button, updating the state on the latest coronavirus figures (grim, but hopefully improving).
There he is on YouTube, patiently showing you how to make a mask and explaining why they help.
And there he is on Twitter, answering questions, sharing information and the odd joke.
He's not the first health chief to inspire a large fan club – but he's the latest.
For Melbourne lawyer David Mejia-Canales, who works from home and is barely leaving the house, Sutton is the "silver fox lining" of the second weeks-long lockdown.
A daily ritual is watching Sutton's daily press conferences with Andrews – without sound.
"They're all just sort of misery and gloom but he makes it so much nicer, so I turn the volume right down and let him perform," Mejia-Canales said.
When he does actually hear his voice, Mejia-Canales is impressed with Sutton's calm demeanour.
"He's so unflappable, even though everything is literally on fire and you know that he's very, very stressed," he said.
"It's the salt and pepper hair and the very calm but very firm tone. It's kind of like having a very sexy school principal."
The Melbourne author and mental health advocate Jill Stark watches the press conferences "religiously" (with sound) and says for many Melburnians the daily numbers affect their mood.
"Numbers have been very high for several weeks. You have a day where the number starts with a 3 and you think that's bad, and then it starts with a 5 and you just feel absolutely flattened by it," she explained. Sutton manages to soften the blow by conveying "enormous resilience" and "real humanity" as he delivers bad news to people who are looking for hope and certainty, she said.
Watching one media conference on the weekend, she tweeted in praise of Sutton's patience when asked to make difficult predictions about the future. "Blink twice if you need help," she wrote.
"Blink … blink," came Sutton's reply.
Messages of concern, support, gratitude and admiration came flooding in. But Sutton added a serious note: "Everyone has a right to grill me on the most significant public health challenge of our lives."
"The level of patience and strength and grace that he shows under enormous pressure to answer every question with a smile and with warmth and with honesty, I think is true leadership," Stark said.
The mood in Melbourne is "really dark", she said. "It feels like we are all going through a sort of collective trauma. And if we're going through that, then the people who are making life and death decisions every day – the pressure on them is incredible."
Melburnians are looking at Sutton almost like a father figure to give them hope and make sense of what is happening, Stark said. "Like, 'Tell us it's going to be alright, Dad'."
But, she said, "he's just one man".
"He can't fix this single-handedly. At the end of the day, it's up to us to change our behaviour and do our bit."
Mejia-Canales agrees that Sutton's online following – a manifestation of what he calls the "universal Melbourne experience" of Sutton fandom – is because the news is so grim.
"It's a very small ray of hope to kind of get you through to the next press conference," he explained.
"There are so few things that are upsides to this second lockdown, but he's definitely one of them."