Australian inflation has biggest ever quarterly fall dropping 1.9% partly due to free childcare
Australia experienced deflation for the year to June and economists expect the Covid-19 recession will keep prices low
Australia has recorded the largest ever quarterly fall in inflation of 1.9% after the Morrison government temporarily made childcare free due to the coronavirus crisis.
Economists expect the country's Covid-19 recession will result in a prolonged period of low inflation, forcing retailers to cut prices or keep them low and crushing workers' hopes of a pay rise.
Australia experienced deflation – falling prices – for the year to the end of June of 0.3%. This was the first time inflation has been negative since 1998, and only the third time in the 72-year history of the index, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said on Wednesday.
Childcare costs tumbled 95% in the June quarter, and the consumer price index was also driven down by steep falls in the cost of petrol, which tumbled 19.3% as demand collapsed and the crude oil price plunged into negative territory, and education, which collapsed by 16.2% after New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland made pre-school free.
"Excluding these three components, the CPI would have risen 0.1% in the June quarter," the ABS chief economist, Bruce Hockman, said.
The chief economist for BIS Oxford Economics, Sarah Hunter, said inflation would rebound in the three months to the end of September due to the government's decision to reimpose childcare fees and the partial recovery of petrol prices.
"But this will mask underlying general weakness in momentum," she said. "Rents are likely to fall further, particularly in Sydney and Melbourne where the loss of demand from international students coupled with new supply is applying significant downward pressure.
"Food prices are also set to soften, with improved weather conditions resulting in an increase in supply, and the challenging conditions in the labour market will weigh on wages growth."
Hunter said poor wages growth and the generally weak economy meant retailers might have to cut prices when jobkeeper and other programs that support households, such as rent and mortgage relief, are watered down "and the full impact of the fall in employment and output is felt".
If deflation persisted it would put consumers off spending money "as they will get more in the future (for the cash they hold now) than they would if they spent the money today," she said.
"This then weighs on firm revenue, which in turn drags down employment and GDP [gross domestic product] growth."
The National Australia Bank chief economist, Alan Oster, said he expected inflation to rebound by about 2% in the September quarter due to childcare and fuel costs.
But he said that "core CPI", which is measured by stripping out items that moved a lot in either direction, was flat and likely to remain that way.
"You're going to have really low numbers for a really long time," he said. "Until 2023, minimum."
Oster said workers had little hope of a wage rise. "It's not just low inflation, it's prolonged high levels of unemployment that's important," he said.
"You are not going to get a pay rise in the next six months unless you are either in the national wage case – you're at the very bottom – or you're two to three years into a four-year agreement."
The Asia Pacific economist for jobs website Indeed, Callam Pickering, said that at 1.3% core inflation was well below the Reserve Bank of Australia's target range of 2% to 3%.
"That inflation target will largely be forgotten in the near term," he said. "Prices of goods and services are being determined by a number of factors largely out of the Reserve Bank's control.
"It is increasingly clear that the Covid-19 crisis will leave a long and lingering shadow over the Australian economy. Inflation is perhaps the least of our immediate concerns – at least until federal and state government interventions begin to diminish."