Scott Morrison opens door to paid pandemic leave for workers needing to self-isolate
PM asks industrial relations minister to discuss it with unions and business, more than four months after unions demanded it
Workers could gain the right to paid leave to self-isolate during the coronavirus pandemic after Scott Morrison revealed he had asked the industrial relations minister to discuss it with unions and business.
Unions first demanded paid pandemic leave in mid-March, and the prime minister opened the door to introducing it on Wednesday, revealing he had asked Christian Porter to conduct consultations "in recent days".
The Australian Council of Trade Unions and small business representatives welcomed the announcement, although the latter argued the government would need to reimburse employers for leave.
On Wednesday, Morrison said paid pandemic leave would be discussed by Porter as part of "ongoing discussions between government, employer groups and employees on a range of issues around managing the pandemic".
Morrison did not reply directly to questions about whether the consultation meant the government now supported paid pandemic leave and why it had taken months to consider it.
The government has previously brushed off demands for paid pandemic leave, pointing to other support payments such as the jobkeeper wage subsidy and state schemes such as Victoria's hardship payments for workers awaiting test results.
Earlier on Wednesday, Porter played down the need for paid pandemic leave, telling 6PR Radio "the system is working relatively well at the moment in terms of coping with that scenario where people have to be self-isolated for a period".
He said paid pandemic leave "makes most immediate sense in the context of aged care" where workers might need "24 to 48 hours out of work action".
Employer groups have been fighting a rearguard action against paid pandemic leave in the Fair Work Commission, where unions have sought to add the right to industrial awards.
In a groundbreaking decision on Monday, the commission ordered residential aged care providers to provide two weeks' paid leave to workers required by their employer or a government medical authority to self-isolate because of Covid-19 symptoms or contact with a person suspected of having Covid-19.
Paid leave is available to casual employees engaged on a "regular and systemic basis" based on the average of their earnings over the previous six weeks. The new entitlement will initially operate for three months.
The ACTU secretary, Sally McManus, welcomed the consultation about "how we can implement paid pandemic leave across Australia".
"We are seeing how one in three workers not having any access to paid leave is leaving a hole in Australia's defences against Covid-19 and that government-funded paid pandemic leave is an essential public health measure to support people to get tested, isolate and stop the spread of Covid-19," she told Guardian Australia.
The Australian Industry Group chief executive, Innes Willox, praised Victoria and Queensland's hardship payments and suggested "other governments should consider introducing similar schemes" – positioning the group to continue opposing pandemic leave as a workplace right.
Labor's industrial relations spokesman, Tony Burke, said it had been 141 days since Labor called for special leave to self-isolate.
"And even now, Mr Morrison still won't indicate whether he supports paid pandemic leave or how long it will take before he actually acts," he said.
"There is no excuse for this delay. The government must act immediately. An estimated 80% of people who have caught coronavirus in Victoria's second wave caught it in the workplace."
At the National Press Club, the Australian small business and family enterprise ombudsman, Kate Carnell, said paid pandemic leave was "a good thing to do, if we can encourage people to get tested and stay at home".
"And, yes, the government should pay. I mean, why wouldn't the government pay if the government is suggesting this is what should happen?
"[There's] no drama about that, we should be encouraging people to stay at home, if they've been tested. It's just good for health outcomes.
"But it's not reasonable to expect businesses to pick up the tab – business are already in a world of pain."
The chief executive of the Council of Small Business Organisations Australia, Peter Strong, said small businesses, such as those with five staff, would "go bankrupt" if they had to pay for all their employees to take leave.
"The government has to pay if they're going to mandate that."
Peak aged care bodies have warned the federal government that existing aged care funding is not sufficient to cover paid pandemic leave outside the Melbourne and Mitchell lockdown areas.
"We are also concerned that the government funding to cover pandemic leave in Victoria's outbreak areas only applies for eight weeks," they said in a statement on Tuesday.
The federal aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, said on Wednesday the government was considering the decision and would respond in "the very near future".