A foreseeable catastrophe: how Covid-19 swept through Victoria's nursing homes
Federal and state governments dropped the ball and an insecure workforce compounded the outbreak which spread to 20% of private residential aged care facilities in just over a fortnight
As of Tuesday 28 July, there were Covid-19 outbreaks in about 80 of Victoria's approximately 400 private residential aged care facilities, with 764 active cases among aged care residents and staff. The infection ratio of staff to residents is about 50:50.
It took just over a fortnight for the infections to spread throughout the sector.
As a result, aged care providers are struggling to maintain staffing levels and basic standards of care, the Victorian government has said.
We take a look at what went wrong in Victoria's aged care sector and what is being done to combat the crisis.
Hundreds of aged care staff in Victoria – including carers, cleaners, administration workers and health workers – who have been infected or in close contact with confirmed cases have been furloughed and forced to isolate while they undergo coronavirus testing.
With so many staff out of action, providers are struggling to provide basic care even for healthy residents, and unwell residents are being sent to hospital even if they do not have Covid-19 due to a lack of staff to care for them.
There is also a significant number of infections in health workers, with outbreaks across hospitals. The Department of Health is yet to release the full list of case numbers in hospitals, but as of 28 July there were 414 active cases in healthcare workers, not including the hundreds more furloughed who are awaiting a test result.
Pressures on hospitals are already increasing, with 230 cases of Covid-19, including 42 in intensive care patients, in the state's hospitals as of 28 July. A significant number of the state's 83 virus deaths – more than one third – have been linked to aged care.
Returned international travellers to Australia are sent straight to hotels and mandated to quarantine for 14 days, and offered Covid-19 testing. In June, it was revealed by the premier Daniel Andrews that security staff monitoring those returned travellers had breached "well-known and well-understood infection control protocols". They acquired the virus from travellers and then spread it through the community, where it subsequently spread to aged care.
The federal health minister Greg Hunt has said the outbreak of the virus from the hotel quarantine program has led to "catastrophic human outcomes", including the spread into aged care. Hunt said aged care residents represented about 70% of the cases diagnosed in Victoria since 1 July. There has been "major community transmission as a consequence" of that initial hotel breach, Hunt said.
No. An insecure, casual workforce has allowed the virus to spread. Aged care workers often work across multiple facilities to make ends meet, and sometimes work while sick due to poor sick leave entitlements and longstanding staffing pressures.
Workers acquired the virus in one facility, then spread it when they went to their next shift at another facility. Some worked with symptoms or while awaiting test results because they could not afford to take leave. Others had no symptoms, spreading the virus unknowingly. Delays between the time of testing and getting results exacerbated this issue.
Labor's aged care spokesperson, Julie Collins, said there were also reports providers did not have adequate personal protective equipment, and there have also been reports about haphazard training protocols on how to use that equipment.
The issues in aged care generally were known well before the pandemic. An interim report from Australia's royal commission into aged care, published in October, was scathing about the sector. "Left out of sight and out of mind, these important services are floundering," the report said. "They are fragmented, unsupported and underfunded. With some admirable exceptions, they are poorly managed. All too often, they are unsafe and seemingly uncaring. This must change."
No, but some have said the federal government, which is responsible for aged care, should have foreseen the risks from Covid-19 in Victoria given the ongoing aged care issues and the difficulty New South Wales had earlier in the pandemic containing aged care outbreaks – including at the Dorothy Henderson Lodge. And international evidence suggests  almost half of Covid-19 deaths across 26 countries were in aged care residents, though this data is evolving as the pandemic unfolds.
Meanwhile, the state government, which is responsible for hospitals, has not been transparent about how health workers are getting infected. This makes it difficult to identify where the failures are.
The state government also decided to use security contractors to monitor travellers in hotel quarantine, unlike other states which used police or defence staff.
Hunt agreed the outbreak was somewhat foreseeable, but said that did not mean it was preventable. "When there are enormous numbers of [the] workforce who are not just ill but as a consequence, for every worker who is ill there are huge numbers that are isolating, then that has an impact on the Victorian system," he said.
It is clear the virus is highly infectious, that some individuals have done the wrong thing, and that some of the spread was bad luck. But both the federal and state governments have responsibility and questions to answer here.
On 23 July the Victorian government announced a $300 Covid-19 "test isolation payment" to support Victorian workers, including parents and guardians, who are required to self-isolate while waiting for test results if they have no sick leave entitlements.
On 28 July, the premier announced all non-urgent elective surgery in Victoria would be halted and specialist health staff from those clinics would take over care in aged care facilities. Andrews said he did not have confidence that existing aged care staff could keep residents safe amid the outbreaks.
Australian Medical Assistance Teams are being sent into Victoria to help in aged care, and five million masks from the national medical stockpile are being directed to the state's sector, as well as 500,000 face shields.
Workers in residential aged care will also receive two weeks paid pandemic leave whenever they need to isolate, until mid-October. But Aged and Community Services Australia, the Aged Care Guild and Leading Age Services Australia released a joint statement to say they are concerned the government funding to cover pandemic leave only applies for eight weeks, and the sector can't afford to pick up the rest of the cost.
"Since the pandemic, providers have invested millions in preventative measures to protect their residents and staff," the statement said.
"We believe aged care workers deserve pandemic leave – to support them and to protect residents and co-workers – however, providers cannot afford it. The sector has been asking the commonwealth to fund pandemic leave since April. There is no way the funding so far announced can cover the cost of pandemic leave."