'You can't switch off': the Covid marshals policing Sydney's pubs
Armed with hand sanitiser, disinfectant, fluoro vests and a stern 'mum' voice, NSW hospitality workers have been enlisted into the battle for public health, ensuring patrons have fun while abiding by social distancing rules
by  Hannah Ryan. Photography by  Carly Earl
Ollie Doran had planned to be on a months-long tour of Europe about now. Instead, he's at work in a Sydney pub, wearing a fluoro vest warning customers to maintain the required social distance.
It's a blunt but, in this context, affectionate message: "STAY BACK CUNTS, 1.5 MTRS OR ELSE!"
In mid-July, following a coronavirus cluster around a pub in south-west Sydney, the New South Wales government issued strict new rules.
Group bookings at pubs would be limited to 10, and every pub needed to appoint a "Covid safe hygiene marshal" – someone in distinctive clothing to oversee social distancing, cleaning and hygiene.
At the Oxford Tavern in Sydney's inner west, that marshal is usually Doran. He completes his outfit with a black cowboy hat, which normally lives on a cheetah behind the bar.
"It wasn't a massive change, we just had to slap on the hi-vis and have some fun with it," he says.
The introduction of the marshal means hospitality workers like Doran have now been enlisted into a battle for public health, wiping down tables obsessively, distributing hand sanitiser and enforcing social distancing.
But Covid safety doesn't always come easily in a pub environment.
"I never realised before how much people like to stand up," Doran says, over the Who blaring on the speakers. "It's a big no-no." Before the coronavirus, the pub would host a sweaty dancefloor until the early hours of the morning. But its patrons have been pretty good with the shift in the rules, Doran says. "Generally people just need a friendly reminder."
One suburb over, at the Warren View hotel in Enmore, Sarah Scharfenberg and Suz Hulton are tag-teaming as marshals. They have also chosen a hi-vis vest option.
People can have trouble remembering to sit down in the excited buzz of a Friday after-work drink, or when they spot friends, Scharfenberg says. Intervening can be a little awkward.
Suz Hulton and Sarah Scharfenberg from the Warren View hotel in Enmore.
"You don't want to be like, 'Do this!' You feel a bit like, 'Hey guys, you know what we told you? We're not just doing it for fun.' You do need to get the mother tone on now and then."
Scharfenberg says patrons have adapted quickly to the rules, understanding that staff and customers need to work together to keep pubs open.
"People do know now," she says. "There's no 'ha ha, I'm only going to the bottle shop', 'but I'm only using the bathroom'" to avoid signing in at the door.
The family-owned pub "went nuts" with hygiene when it reopened a few months ago, she says.
"We got salt sachets and we actually grind people's pepper if they ask for it. You feel so silly doing it in the pub," she says. Every half an hour, she whips out the disinfectant and goes over the poker machines, the bathrooms and door handles.
Over at the Forest Lodge hotel near the University of Sydney, the scent of disinfectant also lingers in the air.
Owner Matthew Sen is wearing a yellow shirt, one of half a dozen he bought at a chain store at $8 apiece when the Covid marshal rule was announced.
Sen says patrons are mostly on top of signing in when they arrive at the pub and making sure they stay seated. The tricky thing is ensuring social distancing, he says.
"At a table, I mean, you can't really manage that," he says. "There's been no specifics around people sitting at the table being 1.5 m apart. It's assumed they're family groups or living together. That's a bit of a grey area."
Forest Lodge hotel owner Matthew Sen.
The topic of hand sanitiser gets Sen animated. "Last week we put the smaller bottles on every table and I'm upping it again. I've got four more wall units coming in," he says. "People really can't miss hand sanitiser here."
Sen says he's walking a tightrope between encouraging people to have a good time and making sure they don't break the rules and cause the place to close down.
When the marshal role was announced in mid-July, he thought his business would "cop it", he says. Business fell by about 10% that week, and even more the following week as people became spooked, he says. But he says part of him thinks he should be thankful for a drop in business. "It will help contain it and stop that big outbreak."
Masking tape indicates a safe distance to line up for beers at the Forest Lodge hotel.
He had predicted a second shutdown on 1 August, and while that has not come to pass, he is still not "extremely confident" the pub will be able to stay open. Daily infections in NSW remain below 20, in stark contrast to the hundreds recorded in Melbourne, where all venues have been closed since its second lockdown began on 7 July.
The marshals Guardian Australia spoke to in Sydney were pleased the government was taking a tougher approach to Covid safety in pubs.
"I'm actually quite happy about [that] because we are doing everything so by the book," Scharfenberg says. "Maybe if those rogue operators are shut down or are fined then there's more of a chance that the rest of us will remain open."
Her time as hygiene marshal has made her "hyper aware" of Covid procedures, even when she is at other venues. "You can't switch off, you're noticing what has or hasn't been done," she says.
Anxiety among staff has occasionally been high since reopening.
Sarah Scharfenberg signs in patrons at the Warren View hotel in Enmore.
"It is quite emotionally draining with the interactions you have, whether it's the person that's signing on at the door and constantly asking people to step back, or if you're dealing with customers that seem quite down or they're struggling, you do take it all on at the moment," Scharfenberg says.
But it's a pub, and they are also trying to have fun with the new marshal role. One colleague, a metal fan nicknamed Slayer, has traced the Marshall amp logo on to his vest.
Over at the Oxford Tavern, Doran is also thinking of shaking things up sartorially. The current plan: a hens' night-style sash reading "Covid Queen".
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.