Essential poll: third of Australians believe quarantine after overseas travel will last two years
Pessimism on the rise with almost 40% of respondents expecting tighter Covid-19 restrictions to be implemented in their local area Peter Lewis: Morrison's election upset forced a reckoning on pollsters. Here's what we've changed
Australians are becoming more worried about the threat of Covid-19 as Victoria recorded the highest number of Covid-19 infections identified in a 24-hour period on Monday, and a significant proportion of people fear lockdowns will spread to other regions over the coming months, according to the latest Guardian Essential poll.
The latest survey of 1,058 respondents suggests 39% of people expect tighter restrictions to be imposed in their local area, and the proportion of respondents reporting they are very concerned about the threat of the pandemic has jumped from 36% two weeks ago to 43% in the current survey. Given recent events, respondents are more worried about the risks in New South Wales and Victoria, where 48% and 47% of the sample reported being very concerned.
People are also becoming more pessimistic about the duration of the crisis.
A month ago, 22% of the sample thought it would be two years before mandatory quarantine after international travel was removed, but that's now up 10 points. A similar trend was evident in response to a question about the duration of the negative impact on housing prices and how long it will take unemployment to return to pre-Covid-19 levels. Just over one-quarter of the sample (26%) fears population-wide resistance to the virus will never be achieved.
As well as charting the darkening mood on the public health crisis, the latest poll also publishes the first primary and two-party-preferred results on the major parties since the last federal election. Guardian Australia suspended reporting these results after the 2019 election because both the polls, and the way the polls were reported, were not giving people a reliable picture of the likely election result.
In future, we will report these results on a quarterly basis, and we will express the metric as two party-preferred "plus", which highlights the proportion of undecided voters, giving people a more accurate read on the limits of any prediction. At the moment, Labor has the support of 47% of respondents to the Coalition's 45%, with 8% undecided.
If we examine the trend over the past six months, the Morrison government endured a slump during the January bushfires but recovered to record its strongest public endorsement in early May. But Labor has been gaining ground steadily over the past month, even though community support for Morrison's handling of the pandemic remains at over 60% in the survey.
Support for state governments has also been solid during the crisis, although the second wave has seen a drop in approval in Victoria and New South Wales. But despite the worrying news out of Victoria over the past fortnight, support for the performance of Daniel Andrews' government has remained steady at 53%.
The survey this fortnight also found:
Australians are divided about the preferred health strategy to combat Covid-19, with 56% of the sample saying governments should pursue a suppression strategy and 46% saying the approach should be elimination. There are differences along partisan lines. Coalition voters (69%) are more in favour of the suppression strategy than Labor (48%), Greens (46%) and voters for other parties (51%).
The public is largely on board with wearing masks to reduce risk, although 13% of respondents are either strongly or somewhat opposed, and 20% professes neither support or opposition. Two-thirds of the sample (68%) support mandatory use in public places (support is at 74% in Victoria). Women, voters over 55, and residents in New South Wales and Victoria recorded strong majority support.
Voters were asked for their views about the extension to the jobseeker and jobkeeper payments by the Morrison government last week. A majority (66%) supported continuing the payments until next March, and 69% approved of businesses having to be retested to ensure they remain eligible for the wage subsidy. While cutting the rate of the payments was supported by 54% of the sample, 21% were opposed, and 40% of respondents were concerned about the continued exclusion of some casuals from jobkeeper.
Voters were also asked about the Morrison government's decision to cancel one of the parliamentary sittings in August on medical grounds given the large outbreak in Victoria and the smaller one in NSW.
People are concerned about the federal parliament not sitting during the crisis. The results show 57% of the sample thinks parliament should keep going with video conferencing instead of physical gatherings, and 17% believe the chambers should sit with appropriate social distancing measures. Only 13% favoured suspension.
The speaker of the House of Representatives and the Senate president have agreed to chair a working group to help determine how and when the federal parliament should sit in a way that is consistent with managing health risks.