Aged care workers awarded pandemic leave in Fair Work Commission ruling
Workers required by their employer or a government health authority to self-isolate because of Covid-19 will receive two weeks of paid leave
Workers in residential aged care including nurses will receive two weeks of paid pandemic leave due to a landmark Fair Work Commission decision.
The full bench of five commissioners on Monday found that employees of residential aged care faced an "elevated risk of being required to self-isolate" and needed the condition added to their award safety net.
Under the new entitlement, workers who are required by their employer or a government medical authority to self-isolate because of Covid-19 symptoms, or contact with a person suspected of having Covid-19, will receive two weeks of paid leave each time they have to self-isolate.
Casual employees engaged on a "regular and systemic basis" are also entitled to leave based on an average of their earnings over the previous six weeks. However, workers who are able to work from home or remotely during self-isolation are not entitled to the payment. The new entitlement will initially operate for a period of three months.
The FWC found that aged care workers faced "significant financial difficulty and even distress" due to the fact they may not have paid leave, in the case of casuals, or have exhausted their leave entitlement.
"The requirement for self-isolation is primarily to prevent the spread of infection which, in the aged care sector is especially critical because of the vulnerability of aged persons to Covid-19 fatalities," the commission said. "Thus, the requirement to self-isolate may be said to be in the public interest."
The Australian Council of Trade Unions has been lobbying for a universal right to paid pandemic leave since April.
The Victorian government has offered workers who cannot afford to take time off while waiting for a Covid-19 test result a $300 hardship payment, although the federal government has resisted introducing paid pandemic leave as a universal right.
The new entitlement was resisted by employer groups such as the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, which argued it is "unfunded and unrecoverable".
The FWC rejected that submission, suggesting aged care providers and even labour hire agencies could recover funding from the federal government for wage costs associated with any required self-isolation of industry workers.
"We are confident that this is a matter that will be the subject of productive discussion between the industry and the commonwealth government," the commission said.
ACTU secretary Sally McManus welcomed Monday's decision but said every worker deserved paid pandemic leave.
"Unions have just won paid pandemic leave for aged care workers which is a welcome step forward, but the problem of workers having no leave goes way beyond aged care. It needs to be for every worker," McManus tweeted.
The union leader said only the federal government could fix the problem.