'Significant risk of dying': Australian aged care workers accuse minister of playing down safety concerns
Survey of 1,000 workers found two-thirds do not feel prepared for a Covid-19 outbreak at their facility
Aged care workers have scolded the federal minister for aged care, Richard Colbeck, after he said the sector was responding "exceptionally well" to Covid-19 outbreaks, accusing him of downplaying their safety concerns as hundreds of the residents they care for face a "significant risk of dying".
The alarm was sounded by the United Workers Union after surveying more than 1,000 aged care workers. It found that two-thirds of workers do not feel prepared for a coronavirus outbreak at their facility, while almost 30% of workers reported having no training in how to use personal protective equipment. More than 90% said they could not afford to take unpaid leave.
The industry's frustration came as Victoria recorded a further 147 new Covid-19 cases among aged care workers and residents on Monday, and five of six deaths among residents of different facilities. Seven of the 10 deaths recorded on Sunday were also aged care residents.
The soaring number of infections across aged care facilities has prompted a government crackdown to stop staff working at more than one facility, meaning if operators sign up to a voluntary code, the commonwealth will pay the cost of a secondary part-time job or shift a worker agrees to forgo.
On Monday, a newly established aged care response centre, jointly run by the federal and Victorian governments, began work to coordinate staff movements across the state, bolster rapid response capability, and improve communications to the families of residents at facilities experiencing an outbreak.
Victoria's chief health officer Brett Sutton said it was hard to announce the total number of cases linked to aged care facilities in Victoria had risen to 683 on Monday, acknowledging it meant parents and grandparents were at "significant risk of dying".
"That's an inescapable fact in these settings. Where there are outbreaks in aged care, the mortality is extremely high."
Premier Daniel Andrews said the rising virus numbers across the broader community were the result of people with Covid-19 symptoms not self-isolating. He explicitly linked this group's complacency with further deaths in aged care, declaring "we will see more people die, particularly in aged care" if behaviours don't change.
Among the 61 aged care outbreaks on Monday, there were 82 cases at Estia in Ardeer, 77 at Epping Gardens in Epping, 62 in Menarock Life in Essendon, 53 at Glendale in Werribee, 57 in Kirkbrae Presbyterian homes in Kilsyth and 50 in Estia in Heidelberg.
However the largest outbreak continues to be St Basil's in Fawkner, which had 84 cases of Covid-19 on Monday.
St Basil's was forced to apologise over the weekend after criticism from residents' families about a lack of communication and information about their loved ones since the federal government introduced a surge workforce to take over the facility last week. A report in the Australian said the daughter of a resident, who had been denied entry to the facility, was forced to remove a fly screen from the window of her mother's room in order to see her.
Nicholas Barbousas, whose 79-year-old father, Apostolis, was a resident at the Greek community-run St Basil's, was told by the operators earlier on the weekend his father was at the home and doing well, despite being told hours beforehand his father was fighting for life in a hospital.
His father died on Sunday.
He told Greek community newspaper Neos Kosmos that communications at St Basil's had been "tragic" after the federal intervention last week, and that he couldn't communicate with his father.
"Imagine … my father was fighting for his life in hospital and I received a phone call from the nursing home notifying me he was in his room at St Basil's. When I asked the call centre they told me he was in … Adelaide."
"And then we lost him," Barbousas said.
While prime minister Scott Morrison on Monday said his "one job ... is to give Dan Andrews and the Victorian government every support I can to help", aged care minister Richard Colbeck, denied reports of PPE shortages, and dismissed concerns that ill-equipped and undertrained staff had contributed to the spread of Covid-19 in aged care homes.
He said facilities were handling outbreaks "exceptionally well" in one interview, and defended the process of only implementing heightened outbreak infection controls after, and not in anticipation, of a first case.
"Once we realise that there's an infection in there I think the sector is doing very, very well at preventing further spread," he said in another interview.
Carolyn Smith, aged care director of the United Workers Union, said the results of the unions survey, which have also been submitted to the aged care royal commission examining Covid-19 in the sector, said the "public has a right to be very concerned".
"Aged care workers have revealed they feel unprepared, untrained and unsafe in the face of this pandemic, which is a damning indictment on national preparations to protect Australia's most vulnerable people," Smith said.
According to the union survey, one worker said: "some residents are going all day without staff even entering their rooms as there isn't enough of us".
Opposition aged care spokeswoman Julie Collins called for the government to audit PPE levels of every aged care facility in the country, after reports more than 1,300 aged care providers in Victoria had requested supplies from the national stockpile by May.