Melbourne school criticised for guidelines requiring coronavirus masks to match uniform
Lighthouse Christian College policy treats masks as 'uniform accessory rather than as a piece of PPE', student relative says
A Melbourne private school has been criticised for introducing coronavirus face mask guidelines that suggest students can only wear plain masks in colours which match the college uniform.
Lighthouse Christian College in Keysborough, in Melbourne's south-east, has told the school community students should adhere to specific school face mask guidelines, according to a video shared with parents, including through Facebook, last week.
Approached for comment about the guidelines on Monday, the school said it would not stop students from wearing masks that do not meet the rules.
In the video, executive principal Avril Howard states that the college has "set standards and protocols in regards to the wearing of masks".
Students should wear masks that are a "standard solid colour", according to the "student face mask guidelines".
Appropriate masks could be re-usable or single-use, but must be grey, blue, black or white, should not contain designs or patterns, and no scarves or bandanas were allowed.
The video, which also provided guidelines on how to use masks safely, suggests students can collect a mask from the office if they forget to bring one to school.
On Sunday, a relative of a current student wrote to the school concerned the policy could encourage parents to go shopping for the correct colour fabric to ensure their child's re-usable mask complied with the uniform policy.
"As a member of the local community and a family member of students currently studying on-campus at Lighthouse Christian College, I am appalled at the school's banning of homemade masks in non-school colours," the relative, who did not want to be named, wrote to Howard.
Lighthouse's senior school uniform features neutral shades of blue, including a dark blue blazer, a black pullover, grey pants or a navy skirt and black shoes.
The relative claimed the policy "forces children to use single-use masks if they don't have the resources at home, or can't find suitably-coloured fabric in-store, to make masks in the suitable colour".
"[The policy] focuses on the appearance of the mask, therefore prioritising school image and treating face masks as a uniform accessory rather than as a piece of PPE."
A senior school staff remember replied by email: "As you are not a parent, guardian or fee-paying member of the Lighthouse Christian College, I find your letter to be very presumptious [sic] and not in context with our values."
"Unless the parent corresponds with us, I will close this matter."
On Monday, Howard said the school was committed to ensure the highest standards of safety and the information was "only a guideline".
"In addition to students bringing their own masks to allow them to meet government requirements we also have masks available for them should they need it and have provided instructions in how to properly use and care for masks," she said.
"As the information we have provided on the wearing of masks is only a guideline, we would not stop or prevent a student from wearing a mask that falls outside of these guidelines."
Since last Thursday, masks have been mandatory throughout Melbourne and Mitchell shire as the state grapples with its worsening coronavirus crisis.
While younger school years have moved to at-home learning, students undertaking year 11 or 12 subjects are attending physical classes.
The Lighthouse Christian College guidelines come as the Victorian Department of Education advertises a statewide competition for students to create masks that are sustainable and could be a "public fashion statement".