Morrison broadens membership of Covid-19 commission but says advice to remain off-limits to public
Australian PM says commission to morph into advisory board as concern mounts over potential conflicts of interest
Follow the Australia coronavirus live blogSign up for Guardian Australia's coronavirus email
Australian PM says commission to morph into advisory board as concern mounts over potential conflicts of interest
Follow the Australia coronavirus live blogSign up for Guardian Australia's coronavirus email
Scott Morrison has broadened the membership of the business advisory body assisting the government with Covid-19 recovery, but has made it clear the group will be advising the cabinet which means much of their input will remain confidential.
The prime minister told reporters on Monday the Covid-19 commission, which he established at the beginning of the pandemic to help keep things moving in the economy when supply chains were severely disrupted, was set to morph into an advisory board that would work inside the government.
"It won't be an external agency," Morrison said. "It will work within government and can form part of the cabinet deliberative processes – which is an important innovation."
The prime minister suggested the group would provide advice about policies to boost economic recovery, and then remain involved as their proposals were considered by the expenditure review committee of cabinet ahead of potential announcements in the October budget.
The group, which consists largely of high-powered company directors and is chaired by the former Fortescue Metals chief Nev Power, is funded by taxpayers.
But it has been criticised for a lack of accountability procedures. As well as the criticism about governance, there has been concern the group's focus is too narrow.
Power's role leading the National Covid-19 Coordination Commission raised concerns among a range of civil society groups about potential conflicts of interest because of an early apparent emphasis on pursuing a gas-led recovery. Power in May stepped aside from his position as deputy chairman of gas company Strike Energy.
The concern intensified after the leak of a draft report by a manufacturing taskforce appended to the commission recommended the government make sweeping changes to "create the market" for gas and build fossil fuel infrastructure that would operate for decades. That report said Australian taxpayers should underwrite a massive expansion of the domestic gas industry – including helping open new fields and build hundreds of kilometres of pipelines.
Later, Paul Bastian, the national secretary of the Australian Manufacturing Workers' Union and a member of the taskforce, rejected the overwhelming focus on gas as the path out of recession. In June, Power described the leaked document as a "very early draft" that "doesn't reflect the views of the commission" – but he did signal the commission was looking at subsidised infrastructure.
Members of the commission have made declarations about potential conflicts of interest given many remain active in the corporate sector, but the government has declined to make the declarations public. Officials from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet have argued they cannot release the declarations because they were provided "in confidence".
Only one of the commission members, the Industry Super chair Greg Combet, went on to release his declaration voluntarily. Combet has now moved on from the commission.
The Covid-19 commission's budget has increased from $3m to $5.4m as it has taken on new responsibilities and functions. As well as providing policy advice, officials told the Senate's Covid-19 committee the commission also hosted a whole-of-government communications group.
Through the commission's budget, taxpayers have funded a $500,000 market research program undertaken by Jim Reed, a long-term researcher for the Liberal party's pollster, Crosby Textor, who now has his own agency, Resolve Strategic. That contract was awarded by limited tender.
On Monday, Morrison appointed new members to the group and confirmed a couple of departures, including Combet, and one of the other original members, the energy executive Catherine Tanna, who would be stepping down once existing projects on utilities and energy were complete.
Morrison said the new members were retired career banker Mike Hirst, the former chief financial officer of Transurban, Samantha Hogg, rural and regional advocate Su McCluskey, food franchise entrepreneur Bao Hoang, Indigenous businesswoman Laura Berry and KPMG partner and former union official Paul Howes.
The government said the commission would sit as an advisory council inside Morrison's portfolio. As well as Power and other commission members, the group has a chief executive, Peter Harris, and seconded staff of about 20 officials.
Morrison will commission advice from the group, and the group may also be called in to advise the government on initiatives being developed across portfolios relating to the economic recovery from the pandemic.
Some of the preliminary advisory material may be able to be accessed under freedom of information laws, but any advice given to inform a cabinet deliberation will be kept confidential.