Covid-19 to compound GFC's lasting impact on young Australians' pay and career progression – study
Productivity Commission report finds young people were struggling to find jobs long before the pandemic
Increased part-time work, lower wages and less choice of occupation have been the decade-long legacy of the global financial crisis for young people – trends likely to worsen in the Covid-19 recession.
That is the conclusion of a Productivity Commission staff working paper that finds young people, especially university graduates, were struggling to find jobs that match their skill and qualifications even before the pandemic resulted in widespread job losses.
The release on Monday comes as Labor and unions prepare to resist the government's bid to extend the power of financially distressed employers to cut hours and a peak business group warns Australia's high minimum wage will hold back the economic recovery from Covid-19.
The "Climbing the jobs ladder slower" report found that – although the global financial crisis was not followed by a period of stubbornly high unemployment – it has had lasting impacts on pay and career progression.
The Productivity Commission found wages of workers aged 20 to 34 grew by an average of 1.46% a year in real terms before the GFC, slowing to 0.86% until 2012 and then declined by 0.08% a year thereafter.
Workers aged 35 to 64, on the other hand, enjoyed real wage growth of 1.7% before the GFC, 1.36% to 2012 and increases of 0.62% thereafter.
The study found that while young workers' chances of being in a job had recovered to 2007 levels by 2017, that recovery was "driven by an increase in part-time employment".
To measure desirability of occupation, the Productivity Commission used a scale of 0-100 developed by the Australian National University based on average education needed for the job and average earnings.
Both young workers and those over 35 were more likely to have high-scored occupations in 2018 than in 2001.
"Once we control for education, a gloomier picture emerges – the distribution of occupations for graduates under 35 worsened," it said.
"Young people aged 25-34 with bachelor degrees are substantially worse off in 2018 than in 2001, particularly in their likelihood of securing a high-scored occupation."
The Productivity Commission found that from 2004 to 2014 about 75% of young people remained in the quartile of jobs with similar quality year after year.
People who graduated after 2007 were less likely to move out of the bottom two quartiles when compared with those who graduated in 2004-2006, with no significant upward movement even as late as 2017-18 implying "scarring for young graduates".
"These results suggest that the recession not only made it more likely that young people would find a low-scored occupation, but more likely that they would remain in low-scored occupations."
The paper argued employers appear not to have adjusted by promoting "unlucky young workers", perhaps because of an "excess supply of recent graduates" in a weak labour market.
In a forward to the paper, the Productivity Commission chair, Michael Brennan, said although it used pre-Covid-19 data, its findings have "heightened salience" now.
"Many young people have experienced unemployment recently, and are likely to face a reduced set of job opportunities as a result of the recession," he wrote. "This scarring could last some time."
Young people have been among the hardest hit by the Covid-19 recession, already the worst since the Great Depression.
In the July labour force statistics, people aged under 25 had an unemployment rate of 16.4%, more than double the rate of 7.4% for the workforce as a whole.
In a statement on Sunday, the national employer association Ai Group seized on new OECD data that Australia has the world's highest minimum wage in the world, to argue pay rates could hamper economic recovery.
"As employers turn their attention from survival to a tentative resumption of normal levels of activity, Australia's position at the top of this particular league table makes the challenging task of a post-Covid-19 recovery even more difficult," said Ai Group chief executive, Innes Willox.
"It risks imposing more extended periods of unemployment and underemployment on young Australians with little workforce experience and employees with lower levels of qualifications."
In June the Fair Work Commission raised the minimum wage by $13 a week to $753.80 a week – or $19.84 an hour – but staggered the increase so the hardest industries will not have to pay it until February.
On Sunday the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said the government had decided to taper down income support because the economy is "in transition" with the effective rate of unemployment trending down from 11.3% today to 9.25% – in line with the official rate – by the December quarter.
The government plans to allow employers previously eligible for jobkeeper wage subsidies to retain powers to cut workers' hours and change their duties or location of work.
Labor's shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, accused the government of drawing "bizarre and potentially catastrophic conclusions" from the first recession in almost three decades, by aiming to stimulate economic growth with further deregulation.
"The answer to extreme job insecurity isn't extreme deregulation," he said.
"Australians can't afford to discard a generation of workers … [the government] needs to come forward with a genuine and comprehensive jobs plan that recognises that a million Australians are already unemployed and 240,000 additional Australians are expected to lose their job by Christmas time."