Future shock: how Australia's universities are changing after the coronavirus cataclysm
Shaken by the Covid-19 induced collapse in international student revenue, campuses are buzzing with ideas of revival
Faced with the reality of a prolonged period of greatly reduced revenue from international students, Australian universities are emerging from their immediate budget crises to begin charting new paths for their institutions.
Taskforces on almost every campus are buzzing with ideas about how to reshape some of our oldest and most important institutions.
It goes far beyond reviewing staff numbers, capital works programs, taking courses online and changing faculty structures.
Universities are interrogating what their role is within the Australian community and the economy, and where their strengths and weaknesses will lie in the future in attracting students – both domestic and international.
And they are urgently exploring how they can continue to fund world-leading research, for which Australia enjoys a reputation of punching above its weight.
Before Covid-19, universities around Australia had focussed their growth strategies on recruiting international students, whose fees enabled unis to build new buildings, fund research and offer a richer campus life, which in turn allowed them to compete aggressively in the international education market.
The decade from 2009 to 2018 saw an unprecedented boom in international student enrolments. The revenue from this activity increased by 260% – from $3.4bn to $8.8bn. Eight Australian universities pushed their way into the top 100 lists around the world.
But the Covid-19 shutdown of the borders brought an immediate and cataclysmic collapse in those revenues. For some this was over 40% of their revenues. Universities Australia modelling puts the sector's total loss of revenue at $16bn through to 2023.
But after the initial shock of being ineligible for the jobkeeper program, and the consequent trauma of having to rapidly adjust their workforces, universities are planning for a future that could be very different.
"We don't expect to ever return to business as usual pre-Covid," ANU's vice-chancellor, Brian Schmidt, told staff and students in his regular June update.
"We will continue to adapt, and we must be willing to be both innovative and measured in this uncertain time," he wrote.
There is a lot at stake. Education is Australia's largest service-based export, which contributed $37.6 bn, directly and indirectly, to the economy in 2019.
"International education is a great success story for Australia," says the chair of Universities Australia, Prof Deborah Terry.
"It reflects hugely on the reputation of the Australian education system and it contributes hugely to our economy and it contributes hugely to our place in the region," she says.
"We educate leaders who go back to their countries right through the region and they have fondness for Australia.
"That's a very important part of not only our economy broadly but our place in the world."
So what happens next? What are the challenges?
The immediate and obvious challenge is for universities to find the right balance between online and physical teaching and to do it with fewer staff.
The Covid-19 crisis has proved in many workplaces that flexible working is possible and that physical presence is not essential, but it's also reinforced the strength and sheer joy of face to face interaction.
Some universities in states with few cases will begin more face to face teaching this semester, but most acknowledge the hybrid model will be the new normal.
That will mean adapting spaces for students to study and socialise safely on campus, while planning to use their physical spaces differently.
Monash University, one of the largest universities in Australia, and a major contributor to the Victorian economy, was already facing g a $350m shortfall before this second shutdown of the state due to Covid-19.
"We have introduced new initiatives to support our students, including the introduction of our inaugural online November intake for 2020 for undergraduate and postgraduate studies in particular subject areas to adapt to this new environment," a spokeswoman says.
"As well, we are planning to use our international branch campus networks in Malaysia, Suzhou and Prato to deliver parts of the face to face student experience for international students in those locations.
"We have built new online tools and platforms, including in online examinations, and changed the way many services beyond teaching are delivered."
Over the past 15 years campuses around Australia have been transformed by building booms that were funded by revenues from the surge in international students.
At the big universities it's helped fund purpose-built laboratories, state of the art research centres, iconic buildings and new college accommodation. Universities have also partnered with state governments to build medical and health campuses which extend public hospital facilities while providing a home for researchers and teaching facilities.
Most universities cut their capital works programs immediately as they grappled with the drop in international student funds.
The next five years (at least) is likely to see an abrupt halt, which will have ramifications for future students and more immediately for the construction industry and for communities around those campuses.
Some universities are already thinking about re-purposing their physical infrastructure to accommodate what is likely to be a closer relationship with business as they seek to replace international student revenues. This could include innovation hubs.
International student fees have also allowed universities to supercharge their research capabilities. Some, like the University of NSW and the University of Melbourne, made attracting world class researchers a hallmark of their expansion and a drawcard to attract international postgraduate students.
But there is intense competition for international talent who can easily move around the globe.
Professor Terry will chair the Research Sustainability working group and will work with a panel of seven vice-chancellors to explore sustainable funding for university research.
"Its very much about ensuring that we have a sustainable model for research going forward," she says.
"We train our researchers well, they will be sought by laboratories around the world. We need to support them here. The vulnerable part of that industry is early career researchers, particularly female researchers.
"As a former vice-chancellor, Prof Ian Chubb, used to say, 'It takes three to tango; university, industry and then government settings need to be in place to support engagement.'"
One of the most likely outcomes out of the pandemic will be that universities will be thrust into the arms of business, as they seek ways to fund research.
Universities performed $12.2bn of research and development in 2018, much of which was funded from within the universities themselves.
While universities in Australia collaborate with business in the application and commercialisation of research undertaken at universities, it's the earlier stage that is vulnerable.
"We have to have a joined-up research and innovation in Australia: from blue-sky research to innovation," says Terry.
"Just take wifi. Can any of us imagine living without wifi? That came out of radio-astronomy work in CSIRO."
The federal government is also driving this development.
The University of Technology vice-chancellor, Attila Brungs, will chair the working group on co-designing the National Priorities and Industry Linkage Fund, announced as part of the government's universities reform package in July.
The education minister, Dan Tehan, has said the $900m fund aims to enhance engagement between higher education and industry, with a strong focus on Stem industries.
Every university will be looking to identify new students and new opportunities.
Early on in the Covid-19 crisis, the government guaranteed $18bn in funding for domestic students, even if the numbers did not eventuate, and put extra funds into short courses. Some campuses see the short course market as an opportunity.
UNSW has identified lifelong learning as another potential growth area. In his 20/21 document released last week, vice-chancellor Ian Jacobs says the university will "accelerate our drive to create tailored learning for students of all ages and identify direct university-to-business opportunities."
"Plans will be developed for a venture to respond to major shifts in the higher educational landscape and how people increasingly want to learn," he says.
Universities will be looking for new ways to stand out from the crowd and make their courses attractive to the brightest domestic students and to international students who brave quarantine rules in the future or take courses online.
The federal government has already agreed that time spent studying online at an Australian university during the pandemic will count towards work visa requirements down the track, which is often an important consideration for international students choosing to study offshore.
But some universities are looking at honing their appeal.
Australian National University's Brian Schmidt said before the Covid-19 crisis that he wanted to keep enrolments in check. ANU has just over 20,000 students, in equal numbers of domestic and international.
"I created a university experience that is distinctively Australian and as good as anywhere in the world: Harvard, Oxford or Cambridge," he told the Financial Review in May.
The ANU plans to keep that unique character.
"ANU recently changed our admissions process to ensure we remain a university where students are not lost in a crowd, but are part of a learning community of outstanding students from diverse backgrounds, drawn from across Australia, our region and the world," a spokesman says.
ANU offered in June to pilot a quarantine system at hotels for international students in the ACT but it is currently on the back burner due to the outbreak in Victoria.
The vice-chancellor of Monash university, Margaret Gardner, told the Financial review in May that she doubted that growth by merger was the future for Australian universities.
She said that there weren't the policy settings that would underpin mergers and that, in any case, universities are already very large. Monash has nearly 70,000 students, making it massive by comparison to British and US universities.
Most universities are looking at greater collaboration, either domestically or internationally to both deal with the impact from staff cuts and to enrich the offerings to students.
For instance, University of NSW plans to further exploit alliances that it already has with other universities to offer joint courses and collaborations. UNSW already has ties with Arizona State University, a leader in studying online and in space technologies, and with Kings College, London.
The three organisations are already collaborating on a design and engineering degree and will now explore more such combined offerings.
All five universities in WA are members of the Forrest Research Foundation and this might be a good model for sharing costs and ideas.
The smaller regional universities face particular challenges.
"Post-Covid-19, there is no room for complacency. Regional universities will need to revisit their business models, reset their priorities, and clearly articulate and deliver on their contribution to regional recovery in order to thrive going forward," says Central Queensland University vice-chancellor, Nick Klomp.
"Just prior to the pandemic, CQUniversity was at the outset of a major investment in digital delivery, student personalisation, and realigning our curriculum to the future of work," he says.
"We've had to reset our finances considerably in the wake of the pandemic, but our investment in these innovations will continue and must continue; they are paramount to our future and the future of the regions we serve."
The regional universities could also feel the brunt of the realignment of fees for courses announced by the federal government last month, with the humanities courses becoming more expensive and vocational courses such as nursing, and Stem subjects, becoming cheaper.
"I recently published an open letter to year 12 students about the government fee reforms, and my message stands. Students should study in areas they're passionate about; that's what's going to give them a fulfilling career, and that's what's going to ensure they stay enrolled at university and cross that graduation stage," Klomp says.
"When it comes to our course offerings, we'll obviously monitor the impact of the fee reforms but ultimately we'll be driven by student demand and regional industry needs," he says.
The fee changes were accompanied by some other changes that the university sector had long been seeking, such as indexing of government funding and more government supported university places, so it was a bittersweet announcement.
The sector is now digesting the changes on top of everything else.
But turning inward is not an option.
"International education is something that Australia punches well above its weight [in]. We are preparing our students – whether international or domestic – to be part of a global workforce," Terry says.
"At the same time teaching and learning and the nature of work is changing. People are going to have to up-skill and re-skill much more than previous generations."
"In the next few years we will need to think through what does an international education look like in the future. How does Australia continue to play its leading role in that area?"
