Victoria's Covid-19 aged care disaster: 'This virus is like a fire out of control'
The Melbourne outbreak is 'terrifying' for families, but experts say it was predictable and systemic problems in the sector were well known before the pandemic
The disaster unfolding in Victoria's aged care homes was "absolutely foreseeable", one of the country's foremost experts in aged care says.
Authorities knew some facilities had poorly trained workers and underpaid part-time or casual staff who had to move between homes to make a living. There'd been overwhelming evidence about the vulnerability of aged care residents internationally. In Sydney, there was the outbreak of Covid-19 at Newmarch House. It was all documented.
"We got this wrong from the very start," says Prof Joseph Ibrahim, the head of the health law and ageing research unit at Monash University. The result, he and other experts say, is what is unfolding in Victoria.
From June 2020 until 23 July, 66 residential aged care services in Victoria have had at least one confirmed Covid-19 case, either a resident or staff member, and many have had dozens.
St Basil's Homes for the Aged in Fawkner in Melbourne's north, with about 150 residents, has had 73 cases, the largest outbreak in Victoria. At least four people from St Basil's have died.
There was an acknowledgement this week that the outbreak at St Basil's, a non-profit residence run by the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia, was out of control, with the federal government taking it over and existing staff sent home to isolate.
The Health Services Union announced on Friday that one of its members, a 53-year-old personal care worker, was in intensive care.
The Menarock Life facility in Essendon, with more than 50 cases, has also virtually collapsed, with all residents evacuated to hospitals. The federal aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, said it was due to the "layout of the facility and the unique challenges of effectively isolating and grouping residents on site".
The Essendon facility is one of at least two that have recently been slapped with a "notice of non-compliance" from the national aged care regulator. In order to avoid a revocation sanction, it must appoint an adviser for at least three months to comply with its responsibilities and "not admit any new care recipients ... until the serious risk to care recipient" is addressed.
Another home to receive a notice was Estia Health in Heidelberg West, with 42 cases of coronavirus.
The vast majority of aged care homes in Australia are privately-run and regulated by the federal government. There are now dozens of facilities with multiple cases. In total, there were almost 450 cases on Thursday across some 35 sites.
On Friday, it was announced that seven more Victorians had died, six linked to aged care facilities. In total, 56 people have died from coronavirus in Victoria, the highest number of any state.
How did this happen? In early April, after Covid-19 had ripped through the Dorothy Henderson Lodge Aged Care home in Sydney, the regulator of aged care facilities decided to assess how prepared the country's other providers were for an outbreak. They launched an online survey asking all facilities to declare if they were ready.
Of the 2,638 residential homes that responded, 99.5% told the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission that they were.
That was reassuring, but it was nonsense, says Ibrahim. The survey was about as useful as a police officer coming up to ask you if you were doing anything wrong.
"The survey was nice to do but asking people questions that they're not aware of and not capable of answering and you're the regulator [means] it's not going to be a hand-on-heart moment, we're in trouble, please visit us and give us a sanction."
Between March and May, the commission conducted only 107 in-person visits to "high-risk" aged care homes in relation to Covid-19 preparedness. They also conducted 10-minute phone calls with all providers.
Commissioner Janet Anderson noted in May to a Senate select committee that many aged homes may have overestimated their ability to cope.
The critical government failure, says Ibrahim, was that while in the early days of the pandemic the focus was on a perceived shortage of acute care beds, ventilators and personal protective equipment, there was little obvious focus on aged care.
"In March, we had all of the stuff come out in Italy, Spain, France, England and the start of New York, all of that information told us that older people died far more in terms of fatality rates, and the highest fatality rate was for aged care or long-term residents".
One report found that between 42% and 57% of deaths from the virus in various European countries were happening in care homes. The estimate is that, so far, about a third of fatalities in Australia are linked to aged care. In Canada, it's 85%.
For residents and their families, Melbourne's outbreak is "terrifying", says Christine Golding, whose mother, 84-year-old Efraxia, has been a resident of St Basil's since 2011. Golding's parents – her father lived at the facility until he died in 2014 – liked its Greek coffee club, Greek newspapers and staff who spoke the language.
Golding says the biggest problem has been communication – she usually FaceTimes her mother, but that hasn't been possible since Monday. She says that when she rings, the person who answers can provide little or no information. "Have yet to hear back from St Basil's – called again," she says. "The person who answered the call asked me, 'What's your issue?' I blasted back: 'I want to speak to the person in charge of this facility. What is their name? I want to find out if my mother is alive or dead.'"
So far, coronavirus tests for Efraxia have been negative.
The first family members heard of an outbreak was in a letter dated 10 July, one day after Victoria reintroduced a stringent lockdown. Nursing director Vicky Kos explained that a staff member who was asymptomatic had returned a positive test and at that point "so far none of our residents are exhibiting any sign of infection".
St Basil's did not return calls from Guardian Australia, but in a statement on Wednesday, the eminence archbishop Makarios announced "with much pain of soul" that with 47 residents and 18 staff infected, all staff would leave the facility and be isolated.
The federal government has deployed a team from private health care firm Aspen Medical to oversee St Basil's. The company is experienced in controlling infectious disease outbreaks overseas and has been hired to work domestically since the pandemic began – including on the Ruby Princess and at Newmarch. It's understood that on 14 April the federal government established a six-month contract with the firm providing up to $15.6m to establish aged care staff replacements and emergency retrieval teams.
Exactly what happened at St Basil's and other facilities is hard to piece together. In an interview with Greek newspaper Neos Kosmos, the chairman of the board, Kon Kontis, said that "this virus is like a fire out of control … we are doing everything we can". Some things have gone wrong. Kontis said some tests had gone missing and had to be repeated. Christine Golding said this had happened to her mother's test.
Ellen Grouios wants her mother, Dimitra, 80, removed quickly but worries other facilities won't accept her. She hasn't spoken to her mother in five days and her mother's telephone rings out. An iPad the family used to communicate had been lost, she was told. Her mother tested negative to Covid-19 earlier this week but on Friday Grouios was contacted and told she had developed a temperature and runny nose. "We are so concerned."
"They need a communication [plan]," she said. "An answering service to put families at ease. They need to start a social media group. They need to put updates on something to keep us informed.
"I want to know the test results, I want to know that negative patients are being moved to an isolated area. I want to know what Aspen is doing and what are the next steps in this absolute disaster."
Ibrahim says the aged care outbreaks were predictable and state and federal governments are now playing catchup. The wearing of face masks for all aged care workers was only made law on 13 July and then only in the locked-down Melbourne and Mitchell shire areas.
The interim report of the royal commission into aged care released in October 2019 laid bare the systemic problems in the sector – they were all known before the pandemic. A recent report found about 20% of facilities did not meet standards in "safe and effective personal and clinical care".
About 70% of the aged care workforce are personal care workers, often with a six-week certificate course as their qualification, with scant knowledge about deadly infection control. It is known that trained nurses have been a declining percentage of the workforce. A large percentage of the workforce are casuals or part-time workers, needing to work at multiple locations to make ends meet.
Victorian premier Daniel Andrews this week suggested much of Melbourne's Covid-19 spread was due to symptomatic people delaying getting tested and more than half of those who had received a test not isolating while awaiting results.
"This is a commentary on insecure work," he said, with people worried that if they don't go to work, they had no sick leave to fall back on. "A bunch of those will be aged care workers."
Victoria introduced a $300 hardship fund, available to those without access to paid sick leave while awaiting test results. If they do test positive they can receive a $1,500 payment if they have no leave entitlements.
The Health Workers Union says 55% of their members in aged care work part-time, and 5% are casuals. Aged care workers often receive about $22 an hour, says union secretary Diana Asmar, and stopping them working a second job would drive many into poverty. The federal government, concerned about workers spreading the virus, is expected to announce a ban on working at multiple facilities next week.
With staff falling ill, there is a concern there won't be enough workers in aged care facilities. The government has provided $234.9m for a retention bonus for workers in aged care facilities and in-home care, although the union says it should be provided for all workers including cleaners, kitchen staff and receptionists, not just carers and nurses.
The union, like Ibrahim, claims these problems have been known for years.
"If the aged care system was not working under usual circumstances, why on earth would anyone think that it would be able to ratchet up to perform extraordinarily well with this new threat?" Ibrahim says.
He argues the government should have months ago announced that every aged care home in the country would be case managed. The response has been too reactive.
Neither the state nor the federal government supports automatically transferring Covid-19 positive residents to hospital – instead saying it needs to be done on a case-by-case basis. The only state to enforce blanket hospitalisation so far is South Australia.
Relatives of those residents anxiously waiting in Victorian homes say they won't stop asking questions until they get answers.
"I will fight for my mother," Golding says.
This story was amended on 25 July 2020 to clarify that Estia Health in Heidelberg West received a notice, not a sanction from the national aged care regulator. It was amended on 26 July 2020 to correct the number of cases associated with that facility from 68 to 42.