Serco stands down Melbourne call-centre staff without pay on one day's notice
Covid-19 outbreak sees multinational indefinitely shut down centre that had been processing Centrelink calls
Multinational outsourcing giant Serco gave staff at a Melbourne call centre just 24 hours' notice before standing them down without pay indefinitely because of a Covid-19 outbreak, after they had spent months helping Australia's surging numbers of unemployed.
The outbreak forced the closure on Monday of the Mill Park call centre in Melbourne, which helps fulfil the company's Centrelink call centre contract with Services Australia.
Documents obtained by the Guardian show Serco has stood down all of its workers indefinitely.
The company wrote to staff on Wednesday telling them they would be stood down without pay from Thursday.
"The stoppage of work means that you are now stood down from work in accordance with section 524 of the Fair Work Act 2009," Serco's contract manager, June Meldrum, said in the letter.
"You will receive your ordinary pay in accordance with any confirmed shifts for today. For full time or part time staff, unpaid stand down will commence from Thursday 23 July 2020 onward. These people may, however, elect to utilise their annual leave entitlements during this period.
"Casual staff will not be rostered from Thursday 23 July 2020 until further notice."
No mention was made of working from home, though the company has said it is attempting to work with its government client to institute such arrangements.
The letter told staff they remained "valued" by Serco.
"I confirm that while you are stood down, you remain a valued employee of Serco. However, we of course understand that you may need to make other arrangements during this period."
A Serco spokesman said the company was working as hard as it could to have staff back performing essential government services "as soon as possible".
"This is obviously an extremely difficult time for our Mill Park team, and we are doing all we can to safeguard our employees' health and safety following the directive given to us by [the Department of Health and Human Services]," the spokesman said.
One source suggested to the Guardian that staff had continued to hot-desk throughout the pandemic, posing an unnecessary risk.
The company denied that claim. It also stridently denied any suggestion that the six cases it had recorded among call centre workers in July had been a result of staff-to-staff transfer.
A spokesman said Serco was conducting temperature checks of staff, had placed perspex screens in workstations, employed "full sanitation protocols", offered face masks, and conducted deep cleans.
It closed the centre last weekend voluntarily but decided to keep it closed on advice from the DHHS.
Serco said the department deemed that all employees of the call centre were "close contacts" of known cases, meaning they were required to self-isolate for the quarantine period and be tested.
Services Australia said the closure of the call centre would not affect its services.
It described the Serco closure as "precautionary".
"Our services are not affected as Services Australia's call centre network spans across the nation, including thousands of additional staff taking calls and processing claims as part of our coronavirus response," the department said in a statement.
"Serco took a precautionary step to immediately close the Mill Park site and will work with the Victoria government's Department of Health and Human Services to ensure the workplace is safe before reopening."
The department also said it required all contractors to strictly adhere to the health authority requirements of the relevant states and territories.
Serco said it had also brought forward access to leave for 233 casual workers who were about to be converted to full or part time.
The company said that left very few casual workers on the site and affected.