Weekly cut of $150 to jobseeker coronavirus supplement will throw 370,000 Australians into poverty
Supplement 'only thing standing between many recently jobless Australians and poverty', Australia Institute thinktank says
Cutting the jobseeker coronavirus supplement by $150 a week will plunge 370,000 Australians into poverty including 80,000 children, according to the Australia Institute.
The progressive thinktank has calculated the cut, announced by the Morrison government on Tuesday, will hit Victoria the hardest with 123,000 more in poverty in the state, which is experiencing a renewed lockdown to fight the second wave of coronavirus infections.
Under the changes, the coronavirus supplement will be extended from 25 September to 31 December at a cost of $3.8bn – with a possible further extension into 2021 – but the payment will be cut from $550 to $250 a fortnight.
After Victoria, hit hardest due to its large population and unemployment rate of 7.5%, The Australia Institute calculated the worst affected states will be:
New South Wales, with 89,000 pushed into poverty including 15,000 children;
Queensland, with 91,000 pushed into poverty including 21,000 children; and
Western Australia with 32,000 pushed into poverty, including 8,000 children
According to Australian National University longitudinal research, the lowest decile of households actually experienced a boost to their income in the first three months of the pandemic, up from $160 to $213 a week, due to jobkeeper wage subsidies and the doubling of jobseeker with the $550 coronavirus supplement.
Matt Grudnoff, senior economist at the Australia Institute, told Guardian Australia the coronavirus supplement had lifted 450,000 people out of poverty – and that "no other government has ever lifted so many people out of poverty so quickly".
Poverty was measured by the Henderson poverty line, a sliding scale based on family size which estimates a couple with two children is in poverty if the household earns less than $47,700 a year, or a single person who earns less than $22,900.
With unemployment rising to 7.4% and projected to reach 9.25% in the December quarter, Grudnoff said the supplement "has been the only thing standing between many recently jobless Australians and poverty". There are currently 13 jobseekers on average for every vacancy in Australia.
"With the ongoing uncertainty surrounding the spread of Covid-19, particularly in Victoria, cutting the jobseeker supplement will only serve to push vulnerable Australians into further desperate situations," Grudnoff said.
"Furthermore, it is concerning that the government has refused to give jobseekers certainty by only applying this supplement through to December, meaning that hundreds of thousands of Australians could be thrust into poverty over Christmas."
The Australia Institute calculated that if the supplement is completely removed 270,000 mortgagees and renters who were not in poverty before Covid-19 will be forced into poverty.
Grudnoff said this "will impact homelessness, put pressure on the banking system and have a knock-on effect to property investors".
"Those who own residential investment properties should be particularly concerned about the government ending the coronavirus supplement."
On Thursday the government released figures showing income support including the coronavirus supplement will cost $6bn in 2019-20 and $11.6bn in 2020-21 before actually returning $834m to the budget the following year, as recipients pay tax on the payments.
The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said the coronavirus supplement is supporting 2 million Australians.
The Australian Council of Social Services praised the government for stimulus measures it said had saved 700,000 jobs but called for it to guarantee jobseeker will not fall to the old rate of $40 a day.
"Instead of cutting jobseeker payments by $300 a fortnight, the government must permanently secure the basics, including incomes and housing; create jobs and restore employment, avoiding another recession," the Acoss chief executive, Cassandra Goldie, said.
"This requires the certainty of a permanent, adequate increase to the jobseeker payment, and public investment in job-creating projects like building housing for people with low incomes, retrofitting homes to reduce energy bills and carbon emissions, and funding for care services that are in high demand."