Environmental laws and Victorian Covid-19 second wave set to dominate national cabinet
Meeting to consider federal bid to quickly overhaul conservation act and plans to contain localised coronavirus outbreaks
Leaders will discuss a proposed overhaul of environmental approvals, and consider the latest on the Victorian outbreak of Covid-19 infections, when Scott Morrison meets premiers and chief ministers for Friday's fortnightly national cabinet.
The discussion about environmental regulation, characterised by federal officials as a status update, follows the release this week of a long-anticipated interim review of the national environmental framework that found Australia's environment was in an unsustainable state of decline and laws set up to protect unique species and habitats were ineffective.
Friday's regular meeting of leaders will be dominated by a stocktake of the persistent outbreak in Victoria, and they will consider plans for containing localised coronavirus outbreaks, as well as considering where recent events leave the trajectory for easing restrictions. There will also be a briefing on new Treasury forecasts, released on Thursday, mapping the impact of the pandemic on the economy, and a discussion about Closing the Gap targets, which are under review.
But the Morrison government has also signalled this week it wants to press ahead quickly with reworking the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation (EPBC) Act, even though the process for reviewing the much-criticised framework is not yet complete.
The environment minister, Sussan Ley, said this week legislation introduced to federal parliament next month would allow bilateral agreements with states and territories to devolve approval powers and include a version of national environmental standards proposed by Graeme Samuel, the former consumer watchdog head who is leading the review of the EPBC Act.
But Guardian Australia understands some of the states have concerns the current push will water down already inadequate levels of environmental protection. Morrison has tied the planned overhaul to a program of deregulation he wants to pursue with the states as part of the economic recovery from Covid-19 – but some of the states will push back if the environmental framework lacks teeth.
As well as potential resistance in the states, conservationists are also worried the response to the Samuel review is being accelerated when the new national environmental standards proposed in the review are only in their infancy.
As Morrison meets the premiers and chief ministers on Friday, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, will make a speech to the National Press Club after the release of new forecasts showing unemployment will peak at more than 9% by Christmas. The same forecasts show the government will deliver the biggest budget deficit since the second world war.
Frydenberg will declare the only way back from the recession will be for the governments of Australia to create "the most dynamic and flexible economy we possibly can". He will say the government in Canberra will continue to adjust its economic plan to match the changing circumstances of the pandemic.
The treasurer will point out reforms to boost growth will be important because other options are limited in the current circumstances. According to a short extract of his speech circulated by his office, Frydenberg will say: "Unlike past recessions, monetary policy is constrained and will do much less of the heavy lifting."
Frydenberg will point out that during the global financial crisis, Australia's central bank cut interest rates by 425 basis points – an option that can't be replicated during the Covid recession because interest rates are already at emergency lows.
He says monetary policy easing on that scale would be equivalent in today's terms to up to $100bn in fiscal support over a 12-month period.
"We don't have that luxury this time around. We also don't have a strong flow of migrants to support growth. Due to lower net overseas migration, annual population growth is assumed to slow to just 0.6% in 2020-21, the lowest rate since 1916-17.
"This time, while we will continue to provide fiscal support through the crisis, sustainable growth will only come from creating the most dynamic and flexible economy we possibly can".