Victoria's aged care system on verge of collapse amid Covid-19 surge, doctors warn
Exclusive: Australian Medical Association says health workers believe there will soon not be enough staff to care for residents
Doctors are warning the aged care system in Victoria is on the verge of collapse – a situation that will be worsened by the federal government's impending announcement that the state's part-time and casual aged care workers will be banned from working across multiple facilities to help contain the spread of Covid-19 through the sector.
The president of the Victorian branch of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Julian Rait, said he had received numerous messages from health workers in aged care warning that with so many aged care workers furloughed due to virus exposure and with cooks, cleaners, health and administration staff fearful of going to work, there would soon not be enough staff to care for residents.
"One frontline emergency department director said because of an increasing number of aged care facilities where staff are not attending, care is being impaired and so they are concerned hospitals may get sick patients as well as healthy ones who simply have nowhere to go because no one is there in aged care any more," Rait said. "We are concerned aged care may be so under pressure in just the next few days it will cause collapse and severe system stress."
The transfer of patients between residential care and hospitals also placed patients and staff at risk of virus exposure, Rait added.
Guardian Australia understands that before the end of the week, casual and part-time aged care staff will be told they will be barred in Victoria from working in more than one aged care facility in an effort to curb the spread of coronavirus. However, 60% of the aged care workforce is part-time or casual, and most of those work across multiple facilities, creating concern in the sector this could impact livelihoods.
The secretary of the Health Workers Union, Diana Asmar, said stopping workers from a second or third job would have "massive financial consequences for them personally". "Most earn $22 or $23 an hour," she said. "They are already on the poverty line, so cutting their hours will be devastating. Those extra hours are the difference between paying for groceries and paying rent."
She said this could lead to an exodus of staff, exacerbating the issue of staff shortages, but added most workers needed whatever money they could still get. "They do this job because they care for people. They truly are heroes on the front line in the fight against Covid-19," she said.
In March the federal government announced $239m in funding for a retention bonus for aged carers to prevent them from leaving the system. Two quarterly payments of $800 (before tax) will be made to staff in July and September. But the payment has not applied to other workers in the sector, such as cleaning, kitchen and administration staff.
"The federal government should reconsider extending the bonus to all Victorian aged care workers, not just the carers," Asmar said. "Aged care workers are all in this together – personal care workers, receptionists, cooks, cleaners, leisure and lifestyle workers, admin workers. They should all get it. We need to retain every single aged care worker in the industry right now, especially if more and more workers get sick or are forced into isolation."
She said she feared aged care workers were becoming a scapegoat for the crisis.
"The federal and state government's have been reactive and not proactive with respect to access to personal protective equipment and strict policing around its use," she said. "We could have firewalled these facilities months ago with adequate supplies. We are now seeing the effect of that failure. The Victorian government announced that Worksafe inspectors will be doing spot checks across Melbourne workplaces. Let's start with private providers in residential aged care and look at their PPE practices for staff, particularly smaller facilities."
The federal aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, told Guardian Australia that work was now being done with private hospitals to support the response to outbreaks in aged care facilities.
"Private hospitals with capacity, adequate staff resourcing, and appropriate infection control procedures will be available to open wards to ensure appropriate care for residents of aged care facilities requiring medical attention, or who cannot safely isolate in their facilities," he told Guardian Australia.
"Funding has been made available to residential and home care providers to ensure aged care employers can cover any additional entitlements to enable employees to work at a single site." The funding would also go towards training additional staff where existing employees are unable to work, and to support aged care workers who are unable to work due to symptoms, self‑isolation or travel restrictions, regardless of whether they would usually receive paid leave.
He said decisions about whether to transfer Covid-19-positive residents to hospital was made on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the resident's medical needs and the clinical advice of the experts managing the outbreak.
"The layout and ability to separate or cohort infected and non-infected residents on-site is also a key consideration," Colbeck said. "In addition, we need to ensure we respect the wishes of all residents affected by Covid-19 in aged care."
But Rait said in addition to these supports, it was time for the Victorian government to announce a more restrictive "stage four" lockdown. The third worst day for new cases in Victoria was recorded on Thursday, with 403 new infections and five more deaths. Three of those deaths were linked to aged care.
"Doctors are very anxious and yet the premier is reluctant to move to harsher measures," Rait said. Many members wanted all stores such as Bunnings closed down and the only workers allowed to go to workplaces limited to "truly essential workers" such as health and aged care staff, he said.
"What the government has suggested to me – and the exact words were – that they want to 'try to educate the community instead because they are concerned the economic cost of stage four will be considerably worse'." Rait said it was too late for educating people as to why staying home was important, and that by closing stores and workplaces they would have no choice but to stay home.
"AMA Victoria asks the government, 'What's the plan? How do we engage with this group of people and change their behaviour? And who exactly are they?" Rait said. "There were a lot of unanswered questions and apparently with no other strategy, with [403] new cases today, we must move swiftly to get this situation under control and AMA is urging the government to implement harsher lockdown measures."
The Covid-19 cases identified in aged care throughout Victoria's second wave include 73 cases linked to St Basil's Homes for the Aged in Fawkner; 67 cases linked to Estia Health in Ardeer; 55 cases linked to Menarock Life aged care in Essendon; 34 cases linked to Estia Health in Heidelberg; 33 cases linked to Arcare aged care in Craigieburn; 21 cases linked to Baptcare Wyndham Lodge in Werribee; and 20 cases linked to Embracia aged care in Avondale Heights.
A spokeswoman for Victoria's aged care minister, Luke Donnellan, said: "The commonwealth and Victorian governments are working with private hospitals to create capacity to support the response to outbreaks in aged care facilities."
"No Victorian will be denied appropriate clinical care when needed," she said.