NSW coronavirus: aged care facility, two schools and childcare centre closed
Facility run by Ashfield Baptist Homes closed to visitors after a staff member tests positive
An aged care facility in Sydney's inner west has been closed to visitors after a staff member tested positive for Covid-19.
On Thursday New South Wales recorded 19 new cases of coronavirus, including in a one-year-old child in the Hunter region.
Two schools and a childcare centre in the Port Stephens area have been closed for deep cleaning and contact tracing.
NSW Health began testing all staff and residents at an aged care facility run by Ashfield Baptist Homes on Wednesday and the facility is expected to remain closed until 31 July pending test results.
The infected staff member dined at Thai Rock at Wetherill Park on 12 July. The restaurant has been linked to an outbreak of 46 confirmed cases in NSW.
"The risk to other staff and residents is considered to be very low as the staff member wore masks, gloves and gowns when working with residents and did not work while symptomatic," a NSW Health spokeswoman said on Wednesday.
An Ashfield Baptist Homes spokeswoman confirmed that the staff member worked three shifts after visiting the restaurant and that families were able to arrange access to residents "on a case-by-case compassionate basis".
"The staff member and the residents and staff who they have been in contact with have been self-isolating and receiving additional supports," the spokeswoman said on Wednesday. "We appreciate this is an extremely difficult and worrying situation for all concerned, in particular the residents themselves, staff and families."
Tomaree public school and Tomaree high school, and Goodstart childcare centre at Anna Bay, will all be closed for contact tracing and deep cleaning after three new cases in the area were linked to a 60-year-old man with coronavirus.
"I understand all three new cases are connected with our first case, the 60-year-old man who was in contact with a visitor from Sydney," the Port Stephens state MP, Kate Washington, said on her Facebook page.
Washington said more information and advice would be provided on Thursday morning by Hunter New England Health.
The state's chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said on Wednesday that the state health department was relieved to find there was a connection between the Hunter region cases and the Thai Rock Cafe.
"They were a close contact of someone who has been to the Thai Rock," she said. "I think this just highlights how rapidly the virus can move.
"For a period of time we were concerned that the case in Hunter New England could have been another cluster that we didn't know, a tip of the iceberg, but the fact that we were then able to link it back to someone who attended the Thai Rock and that link was established means we are dealing with a different issue."
Chant confirmed the man had still been infectious while in the region and further contact tracing was underway.
Virus-positive cases also attended the Woolworths supermarket at Salamander Bay Village and Fingal Bay cafe and takeaway, with both venues undergoing cleaning.
"I understand all three new cases are connected with our first case, the 60-year-old man who was in contact with a visitor from Sydney," Port Stephens state MP Kate Washington posted on her Facebook page on Wednesday.
Meanwhile, the total number of cases linked to the Crossroads Hotel cluster has now reached 56.
The NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, implored residents to avoid crowds and limit non-essential travel at the weekend and for the next few weeks.
She also said businesses were on notice as a new suite of Covid-19 measures came into place on Friday.
"The next few weeks are the most critical in NSW since the lockdown earlier in March and April," she told reporters on Wednesday.