Companies receiving jobkeeper have laid off more than 700,000 excluded workers
Treasury figures lay bare the impact of the Coalition's decision to shut out short-term casual workers and temporary visa-holders
Almost three-quarters of a million employees of companies receiving jobkeeper were laid off because they were ineligible for wage subsidies, according to an Australia Institute analysis of data in the Treasury review.
The Treasury review, released on Tuesday, reveals that between mid-March and the end of April half of all ineligible employees of companies claiming the $1,500 fortnightly payment were laid off.
The figures lay bare the impact of the government's decision to exclude 1.1 million short-term casual workers and 1 million temporary visa-holders from the wage subsidy – exclusions that were opposed by Labor, the Greens and unions.
The Treasury review revealed that organisations claiming jobkeeper cut 5% of jobs held by eligible employees in the first fortnight after the policy was announced on 30 March "but these jobs have since been fully restored".
"The job losses have been largely borne by ineligible employees in organisations that are jobkeeper recipients," it said.
A Treasury graph showed when the policy was introduced, employees of companies that didn't claim the payment made up 60% of the workforce, eligible employees of claimants were about 26% and ineligible employees of claimants 14%.
Based on the fact that ineligible employees halved from 14% to 7% of the workforce by the end of May, the Australia Institute calculated 723,700 people lost their jobs because they were ineligible for jobkeeper.
David Richardson, a senior research fellow at the Australia Institute, said there was "unfortunately … a strong incentive in jobkeeper to dismiss non-eligible workers".
"Jobkeeper was designed in a way that deliberately excludes whole sections of the community, including some of the most economically vulnerable people in the country," he said.
"Too many workers in highly casualised and insecure industries, such as arts and entertainment, hospitality, retail and accommodation have been intentionally overlooked by this scheme and now we are seeing the consequences in black and white."
Richardson said the government "should be doing more to support those casual and non-resident workers who were often already struggling before the pandemic".
On Tuesday the government announced it will extend the period but cut the rate of jobkeeper wage subsidies and the jobseeker coronavirus supplement.
Eligibility for jobkeeper was further narrowed, with businesses needing to requalify for the payment and the introduction of new lower rates for workers doing less than 20 hours a week, despite Treasury advice there was little clear benefit to a differential rate.
In April, Guardian Australia reported that 180 people were stood down at South Pacific Laundry. The company confirmed in emails to the Construction Forestry Mining Manufacturing and Energy Union's manufacturing division that it had stood workers on visas down first "as they don't qualify for the jobkeeper payment".
The company disputed that it had targeted visa-holders but declined to answer questions about how many were stood down.
One Nepalese worker at the laundry, who declined to be named for fear he could not return to his job, told Guardian Australia the company was "unable to give us work because of the downturn in the business" but "they are still giving the work to people who are jobkeeper eligible".
Andrew Giles, Labor's multicultural affairs spokesman, said the case was an example of "why we need greater support for temporary migrants trapped in Australia during this pandemic".
"We can't allow people to fall through the cracks and become destitute," he told Guardian Australia.
Throughout the Covid-19 pandemic, food banks and restaurants giving away free meals have supported international students and other temporary visa holders locked out of federal government support, with a further spike in demand expected from Melbourne's second lockdown.