Calls for paid pandemic leave grow as Victorian premier links Covid-19 surge to insecure work
Union leaders renew their push for two weeks of leave for all, including casual and gig workers
Unions have renewed their call for universal paid pandemic leave after the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, linked the state's surge in coronavirus cases to insecure work that means people miss out on pay if they self-isolate.
Insecure work, such as casual or gig employment, was "literally killing older Australians", the Victorian Trades Hall Council secretary, Luke Hilakari, said on Wednesday as the state's Covid-19 death toll increased by two to reach 44.
The Andrews government has offered a $1,500 payment to casual or gig economy workers who need to self-isolate because they have tested positive, but take-up of the offer has been poor and it does not cover the gap between testing and getting a result.
Andrews said on Wednesday that nine in 10 Victorians who tested positive between 7 and 27 July, or 3,400 people, did not isolate between feeling sick and getting tested – a period when they were "at the height of their infectivity".
"It won't be exclusive, but there is a large proportion of these people who are making these choices because, in their judgment, they'll look at their bank balance, they'll look at the fact that, if they don't work the shift, they won't get paid for the shift, they don't have sick leave – this is a commentary on insecure work," he said.
"This is a commentary on this as a feature of the Victorian economy and our national economy. That debate, though, can wait."
So far only about 1,200 people have applied for the $1,500 payment.
Andrews indicated he was considering extending it to cover the gap between testing and result – something Hilakari said he wanted to see.
"If we don't pay for it with $1,500, we're going to pay for it with billions of dollars when whole industries shut down," he said.
Since May, unions have also been pushing for two weeks of universal paid pandemic leave, no matter what your employment status, and Hilakari said the Morrison government was "out of excuses".
He said people in insecure work could not afford to miss shifts.
"These people in low-income and insecure positions are in a really difficult position," he said.
"This is when an employment crisis becomes a health crisis because my grandma might die."
He said migrant workers were especially vulnerable because they were not eligible for jobseeker payments and, by world standards, Australia had a high rate of insecure employment of one in three workers.
"It has to be that casual workers and undocumented migrant workers are included," he said.
"If you don't have any access to any other leave there should be two weeks pandemic leave – that's something the federal government could legislate today."
The secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Sally McManus, said the lack of pandemic leave was "a massive hole in our defences against this pandemic which must be closed".
The Fair Work Commission is set to consider paid pandemic leave for workers in aged care, a sector that has emerged as key in terms of Covid-19 transmission, but McManus said the entire economy should be covered.
"All workers need access to paid pandemic leave, immediately, to help ​stop the spread of the virus," she said.
"Workers without paid leave will avoid getting tested so that they can keep their jobs and that ​risks escalating the spread. We must ​stop putting people in this impossible position.
"A huge proportion of transmission is happening in workplaces so it is essential that we facilitate workers staying home when they need to."