Victoria records 484 new coronavirus cases on worst day of outbreak
Victorian premier Daniel Andrews considers new restrictions as Covid-19 continues to spread in the state and NSW records 16 new cases
Australia has recorded the highest number of coronavirus cases since the pandemic began, with Victoria reporting a record 484 cases in 24-hours as the premier, Daniel Andrews, said the virus is being spread by infected people turning up to work because they do not have sick leave.
The national total on Wednesday was 502, with 16 from NSW, one from Queensland, and one from South Australia.
Two Victorian men in their 90s also passed away on Tuesday night, taking the state's death toll to 44. Both men were residents in aged care homes, and authorities have warned of further deaths with 85 people testing positive to Covid-19 across 45 aged care facilities in the state.
"There are 300 positive cases overall in aged care," Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said. "It's roughly 50-50 in terms of workers and patients."
Meanwhile, authorities in New South Wales are nervously awaiting test results from residents and staff at a Sydney aged care home after a staff member was diagnosed with coronavirus on Wednesday.
NSW Health – which had recorded 16 new cases earlier on Wednesday – announced that a staff member of Ashfield Baptist Homes had tested positive to Covid-19 after dining at the Thai Rock restaurant in Sydney's west.
The Sydney Local Health District tested all residents and staff of the aged care home after learning of the diagnosis, with the risk to others "considered to be very low" because the staff member wore personal protective equipment and did not work while symptomatic.
The Ashfield home has been closed to all visitors pending the test results.
Corrections Victoria on Wednesday, meanwhile, revealed a prisoner in Melbourne had tested positive to Covid-19, a day after a prison officer tested positive at a separate facility, resulting in six prisons in the state being locked down and prompting calls from advocates to release low-risk inmates.
The latest case at the Metropolitan Remand Centre was someone serving a mandatory 14-day quarantine for all new prisoners entering custody.
At the daily press conference earlier on Wednesday, Andrews reiterated that potential prisoner releases were "not a focus of our attention at the moment", instead zeroing in on the nine in 10 symptomatic residents that authorities believe aren't isolating correctly.
Victoria's case numbers on Wednesday werehigher than the nation's peak during the first wave, when on 28 March the Australia-wide total was 469 cases.
Of Wednesday's cases, 97 were connected to known outbreaks and 387 were under investigation. The premier suggested the total could be reduced after duplicates were removed.
Andrews said he was not announcing changes to restrictions or the implementation of a stage-four lockdown.
He said that people failing to isolate between the onset of symptoms and getting tested may be a large source of new infections.
"From 3,810 cases, which are the cases between July 7 and July 21, I'm very unhappy and very sad to have to report that nearly nine in 10 – or 3,400 cases – did not isolate between when they first felt sick and when they went to get a test," he said.
"That means people have felt unwell and just gone about their business. They have gone out shopping. They have gone to work. They have been at the height of their infectivity. And they have just continued on as usual."
Andrews said Victorians were also failing to isolate while waiting for results.
"I'm equally saddened to have to report that 53% – or 2,056 of those 3,810 cases – did not isolate, that is, did not stay at home and have no contact with anybody else between when they had their test taken and when they got the results of that test.
"The number of people who are sick but not getting tested, they are tested but not waiting for the results at home and instead, going to work, a bunch of those will be aged care workers. Let's not judge them. Let's try and work out what is driving it," he said.
Andrews said unless that behaviour changed, numbers would continue to rise and the lockdown imposed on Melbourne and Mitchell shire would be extended.
Andrews suggested that those in insecure or casual work were more likely to work while sick or awaiting test results.
"There is a large proportion of these people who are making these choices because, in their judgment, they'll look at their bank balance, they'll look at the fact that, if they don't work the shift, they won't get paid for the shift, they don't have sick leave – this is a commentary on insecure work," he said.
"It's a very important debate to have, we can have that debate another time. In the meantime, though, trying to hone in on the problem, understand the problem, and then put in place specific measures to deal with it."
Andrews highlighted the $1,500 dollar hardship payment available to those required to isolate and who do not have access to sick leave, but this is only accessible if an individual has tested positive or are close contacts who have been asked to isolate.
Those awaiting test results are not eligible.
"If there's a need for us to go further and deal with that one and two-day period, which is where those 53% of people who are not staying home … we're just doing further work on that."
When asked if there were specific penalties for those who leave the home for essential reasons while awaiting test results, Andrews said he was unsure.
"I'm not entirely sure of that … Let me come back to you in terms of whether there's a specific penalty that can be applied. We'll get much better outcomes by appealing to people and dealing with the drivers of this rather than fining people for it," he said.
The chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, defended the state's contact-tracing operations, after multiple reports of close contacts waiting multiple days to be contacted by the department of health and told to isolate.
"We would absolutely aim, from the time we've got a receipt of a positive result, to phone people in the first 24 hours," Sutton said.
He suggested up to a third of Victorians were not answering their phones when the department called.
"No one would be happy with a delay in terms of identifying close contacts. So, again, if people can pick up the phone, we know that we'll get those details earlier and we can follow up with those close contacts. If people already know that they are a case, they can go through the process of detailing all of those close contacts. And indeed, contacting them if they're comfortable in doing so."
As of midnight Wednesday it will be mandatory to wear masks while in public in Melbourne and Mitchell shire.
Andrew hinted at "no-mask, no-shop" type policies being introduced at stores.
"The big supermarkets are very keen that I get the message out around mask-wearing … you may well be turned away if you turn up at your Coles or Woolies or IGA and you don't have a mask on."
Andrews was asked about blanket asymptomatic testings for high-risk industries such as aged care or abattoir workers.
"We'd have to take advice on that and look at the proportionate cost. When I say 'cost' – we've only got so much lab capacity on any given day. We wouldn't want a situation where we were testing people who had a very low probability of having the virus – and again, a test is only a snapshot in time," he said.
Andrews urged residents not to put masks on infants or toddlers.
"We have seen some reports of people selling masks for toddlers and babies – that is simply not on. Toddlers should not be wearing masks. Kids 12 and up should be, but under that age, they're not required to, and babies and toddlers should not be wearing masks. Do not buy those products. Do not use those products."
The premier, Gladys Berejiklian, said that one of the new coronavirus cases in that state was in hotel quarantine and it was reassuring the remaining 15 cases were from known sources.
"The one positive take from all of those cases … they were from existing known clusters or existing known contacts," she said.
"So the fact that there is not a new stream of outbreak is reassuring at one level."
The NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said that of the new cases 11 were associated with the Thai Rock restaurant, bring the cluster up to 37. That included a man from the Hunter New England region.
"They were a close contact of someone who has been to the Thai Rock. I think this just highlights how rapidly the virus can move," she said.
"For a period of time we were concerned that the case in Hunter New England could have been another cluster that we didn't know, a tip of the iceberg, but the fact that we were then able to link it back to someone who attended the Thai Rock and that link was established means we are dealing with a different issue."
Chant confirmed the man was still infectious for a period of time while in the region and further contact tracing was underway.
Residents from the Hunter New England region have been advised by local health authorities not to travel to Sydney if possible.
Although the state government has not posed formal restrictions in regards to regional travel, Chant suggested that all residents "just reflect on their [non-essential] travel arrangements" in the coming weeks.
Three of Wednesday's cases were associated with the Crossroads Hotel cluster, bringing the total to 53.
The last person was a close contact of a previous case and is not associated with any clusters.
Chant said there were multiple points of infection from Victoria into NSW.
"Genomic screening of the virus has helped us to understand that they are all a strain similar to that circulating in Victoria. Now, that is important to note that we don't think they are all from the one person. What they represent is that the virus is similar and we believe that there were different sources of exposure."
Berejiklian defended the hardening of the NSW-Victoria border, a move which limits the reasons border town residents can cross the state lines.
"When we closed the border initially there was still in excess of 200,000 permits given, and unfortunately, as you see with the situation in Victoria, we don't have any assurance that there is no community transmission in regional Victoria. Now, that puts all of NSW at risk," she said.
"It would have been far easier for us to do what Queensland did to us. We could have easily said, that is a border and that is it."
Queensland also reported one new case in the past 24 hours.
The premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said this was a member of the Australian defence force returning from overseas and was quarantining.
The state now has three active cases.