Coronavirus clusters: why meatworks are at the frontline of Australia's 'second wave'
Three new Covid-19 clusters have emerged in Brooklyn, Tottenham and Colac in Victoria
Around the world, certain environments have repeatedly proved to be hotbeds for Covid-19 infection. Chief among these are aged care homes, cruise ships, prisons and abattoirs.
As Victoria enters a "second wave" of Covid-19 infections, Australian meat processors have found themselves at the frontline of exposure and infection, with multiple outbreaks in abattoirs across the state.
In the US more than 16,000 meat workers contracted the virus during April and May, with up to 9% of the workforce infected in some states, according to the Centers for Disease Control. While conditions in Australia are different in many respects, the situation in Victoria still points to the potential for rapid spread.
The largest abattoir cluster was at Cedar Meats in May, which affected 111 workers and close contacts. Victoria's chief health officer, Brett Sutton, has confirmed that this cluster is now inactive, with genomic testing suggesting the specific strain of virus present in the outbreak has died out.
But now three new clusters have emerged, including 38 cases at the JBS meat processing plant in Brooklyn, just 2km from Cedar Meats in the western suburbs of Melbourne.
The largest active meatworks cluster in the state is associated with Somerville Retail Services in Tottenham. According to the company's LinkedIn profile, the factory primarily processes meat products for Coles supermarkets. There are now 60 cases linked to the facility.
An outbreak has also emerged at the Australia Lamb Company, a major employer in the regional Victorian town of Colac, with 13 cases currently linked to the plant.
It is understood Trinity College in Colac was closed after a student and their parent, a plant employee, both tested positive.
Colac Otway shire's mayor, Jason Schram, told the Age he wanted the health department to order a two-week lockdown in the shire to help curb the outbreak, but on Tuesday the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said this was unnecessary.
"We're not at the point where we will bring the whole local government area into lockdown, but things can change," he said. "There has been widespread testing and everybody in that facility has been asked to consider themselves a close contact and to isolate," he said.
On Tuesday, there were 27 active cases in the Colac Otway shire.
All three factories associated with outbreaks have been temporarily closed and their entire workforces asked to quarantine.
There was also one case associated with Pacific Meats abattoir in Thomastown on 6 July but it appears the virus did not spread.
Current World Health Organisation advice suggests there is no evidence of the virus being transferred through food to consumers.
Sutton has previously stated that infections in abattoirs are "intrinsically difficult" to control for a number of reasons.
Abattoirs operate along a production line, making social distancing impossible in many places as machines and platforms are permanently installed at set work stations.
Matthew Journeaux, the secretary of the Queensland branch of the Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union, told Guardian Australia earlier this year plants were often densely staffed.
"There is very little automation in meat processing, each step is highly labour intensive, so this means you end up with a lot of people all in the same factory."
Prof Benjamin Cowie, an infectious disease expert for the Doherty Institute, said refrigeration might also contribute to rapid transmission.
"Certainly, we know that the coronavirus that causes Covid-19 … is more stable in cold conditions," he said.
Shifts at meatworks are long, meaning in busy periods workers may be standing within a metre of each other for 10 to 12 hours a day. Cowie said this "unquestionably" increased the risk of infection.
Language barriers may also contribute to the high prevalence of infection. Australia's meat processing industry relies heavily on migrant workers, with a considerable portion of the workforce born in non-English speaking countries.
In the US, 87% of all infected meat plant workers in April and May were part of racial or ethnic minorities, the CDC report found.
In April, the US president, Donald Trump, ordered US factories  to stay open regardless of Covid-19 outbreaks.
In comparison, Pacific Meats in Victoria was ordered to close after a single case of Covid-19 was found and testing was required of all staff.
However, the few meatworks clusters Australia has experienced have quickly grown from one case to dozens, with close contacts and connections to school communities magnifying the effects.