Truck drivers voice frustration over tougher NSW-Victoria border restrictions
New rules in place since midnight and the cancellation of previous travel permits have caused 'confusion, anxiety and angst', union says
Tougher border restrictions are now in place for people wanting to enter New South Wales from Victoria, including a border zone set up along the Murray River as Covid-19 cases rise across the northern state.
The new restrictions began at midnight, with cross-border travel permitted solely for work, education, medical care, supplies or health services.
Among the changed requirements, staff or students at boarding schools or universities must self-isolate for two weeks and obtain a negative virus swab, while seasonal workers from Victoria are barred entry.
The Transport Workers' Union NSW secretary, Richard Olsen, said the cancellation of previous travel permits and the need to reapply had caused "confusion, anxiety and angst" in the transport industry on Tuesday.
"Drivers are already under pressure, with the squeeze on the transport industry as a critical service during this pandemic," Olsen said in a statement.
"The NSW government must do better and allow for drivers to plan ahead so they can continue the provision of an essential critical service."
NSW recorded 16 new cases of coronavirus from 18,465 tests in the 24 hours to 8pm on Tuesday. Three people diagnosed are close contacts of cases from the Crossroads Hotel cluster. Eleven people are associated with the Thai Rock restaurant cluster, including a man in his 60s from the Hunter region.
One person diagnosed in western Sydney is a close contact of a previously reported case that was not associated with a known cluster.
Just one case is in hotel quarantine.
NSW Health is also urging anyone who visited the Salamander Bay Shopping Centre on 15 July to watch for Covid-19 symptoms following a confirmed case – a man in his 60s – in the Port Stephens area. The man was infected by a visitor from Sydney.
That Sydney contact also visited the Windsor Castle hotel in East Maitland between 6pm and 8pm on 13 July, NSW Health said.
The NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, said she would not yet follow Victoria's lead in enforcing mask use in public but reiterated the state's residents should wear masks when social distancing isn't possible.
She said health authorities on Tuesday confirmed all NSW virus clusters had the same genomic sequencing and thus emanated from the same source.
"We said from day one, if you can't guarantee social distancing, you should be wearing a mask – that includes public transport, that's what the health advice is," Berejiklian told the Nine Network on Wednesday.
"When elected representatives make it up on the go, it is not a good thing."
Berejiklian said social distancing measures and avoiding non-essential travel remained the best method to halt the spread of Covid-19.