Qantas says government support for airlines likely needed beyond March
Senate Covid-19 committee hears aviation staff excluded from jobkeeper are choosing between paying rent and buying groceries
Qantas says government support for aviation may need to continue beyond March next year because airlines are in the middle of the biggest crisis the industry has ever faced.
The Senate select committee on Covid-19 heard evidence on Tuesday regarding the impact of job losses and uncertainty across aviation businesses.
Catering staff excluded from the jobkeeper wage subsidy said they were making "heartbreaking" choices between paying the rent and buying groceries.
The former Macquarie Group boss, Nicholas Moore, also faced questions about his role as the government's go-between with the administrators of struggling second airline Virgin Australia, saying he was being paid $1 for the position and that he had declared his personal interests to the Treasury.
Executives from the flag carrier Qantas told the hearing they saw a need for government assistance for the industry to go beyond March 2021 – the cutoff point for the newly extended jobkeeper scheme.
Andrew Parker, a Qantas executive, said Scott Morrison's decision on Tuesday to continue jobkeeper until March was important because it would give the company more time to assess the state of the economy and border restrictions. This would pave the way for further discussions with government.
He said programs like the aviation relief package were important for Qantas and others as "we've all got lots of bills to pay".
Parker said Qantas "would very much encourage" the government to continue to offer relief on aviation fees and charges "well into the middle of next year to help us in this start-up phase, to try to keep that $40m a week cash burn as low as possible".
"Jobkeeper is a really critical basket for us, but so are some of the other government programs, including continuing the minimum network and including the fee and charges relief well into next year," he said.
Qantas representatives were unable to say during the hearing how many of the 6,000 planned job cuts would be achieved through compulsory redundancies.
But unions told the hearing it had been a confusing and stressful time for workers across the industry.
Nick McIntosh, the assistant national secretary of the Transport Workers' Union, said the government needed to be condemned for excluding companies such as the airline catering company dnata from jobkeeper.
This company – owned by Qantas until 2018 – has told its 5,500 workers it is ineligible because it is now owned by the Emirates Group, in turn owned by the UAE government.
"Even though Australian workers of dnata and Cabin Services Australia have paid Australian taxes all their lives and many have never asked the government for anything – the quiet Australians that our prime minister always speaks of – in their hour of need their government has abandoned them," McIntosh said.
Darlene Bailey, a dnata employee from Sydney, said the uncertainty had "had a heartbreaking effect on colleagues who have had to choose between paying their rent and buying groceries".
"They have not been able to afford school uniforms for their children; they have put off doctors' appointments and any expense or bill they could delay," she said.
"My co-workers have used all their leave, drained their super, and maxed out their credit cards. But still we have no certainty. We are stuck in no man's land."
Linda White, the assistant national secretary of the Australian Services Union, said there were "many, many employees of international carriers in the same situation because of the ownership of their airline".
Teri O'Toole, secretary of the international division of the Flight Attendants' Association of Australia, said the decision on Tuesday to reduce the rate of the jobkeeper payment after September would have "a significant effect on cabin crew who have been unable to find alternate employment".
Moore, the former Macquarie chief, confirmed he was being paid "a dollar" to represent the government in discussions with the Virgin Australia administrators and bidders because he was "honoured to be asked" to help.
He said he had spoken to the administrators "most days" and his role also included talking to bidders "to the extent they wanted to ask any questions or provide any information to the government".
Asked whether the administration process would ensure a viable second airline in Australia, Moore said creditors were due to meet in August to discuss a deal with US private equity group Bain Capital "but certainly it appears to be going down a path that gives the company and the stakeholders in the company quite a degree of comfort that there is an end in sight – but we're not there yet."