RBA governor says government must spend to limit severe 'economic scars'
Philip Lowe backs government spending but warns against the Reserve Bank creating money, saying 'there is no free lunch'
Australia would risk long-term economic and social "scars" without the government borrowing to fund programs aimed at reducing the severity of the Covid-19 downturn, the head of the central bank has said.
The Reserve Bank governor, Philip Lowe, said in a speech on Tuesday that the path ahead in the jobs market was expected to be "bumpy" and he emphatically backed the need for government spending to limit the damage to the economy.
But he warned against the idea of the Reserve Bank creating money to directly finance the government, saying "there is no free lunch" and "the tab always has to be paid and it is paid out of taxes and government revenues in one form or another".
Speaking just hours after the Coalition announced it was extending, but paring back, elements of the jobkeeper wage subsidy and jobseeker payments, Lowe argued it was right for the Australian government to be prepared to borrow against future income to "smooth out the hit to our current income".
"For a country that has got used to low budget deficits and low levels of public debt, this is quite a change," Lowe said in an address to the Anika Foundation.
"But it is a change that is entirely manageable and affordable and it's the right thing to do in the national interest."
With the government preparing to explain the cost of a range of stimulus and support programs in an economic update on Thursday, Lowe's intervention indirectly addresses potential anxieties in Coalition ranks – and the public more broadly – about the increase in debt to fund the emergency measures. Labor recently called for an audit of the government's management of commonwealth debt.
Lowe said the evidence from history was that "the deeper and more protracted a downturn, the more severe are the economic scars".
These scars included young people not getting onto the jobs ladder – or slipping off it – with permanent effects on their lives, people losing training opportunities with long-term consequences for their career prospects, and lower levels of investment in physical capital and research.
Lowe also cited "the damage to the fabric of our society and to people's lives that is caused by a long spell of unemployment".
"We need to do what we can to limit the severity of these costly scars. These scars have long-term effects and they damage our society and our economy."
Lowe pointed out that debt across all levels of government in Australia, relative to the size of the economy, was much lower than in many other countries, and the Australian government could borrow for five years at just 0.4% and for 10 years at just 0.9% – the lowest borrowing costs since Federation.
This meant the public balance sheet was "well placed to smooth out the shock to private incomes and support the economy through the pandemic".
He said attention would return to reducing the build-up of debt "at some point in the future" – and that would best be achieved through economic growth.
Lowe's observations about the role of government borrowing and spending come at a time when he concedes that there are "limitations" to what more the Reserve Bank itself could achieve through monetary policy in the current environment.
The Reserve Bank decided at its board meeting two weeks ago that it would maintain the package it adopted in March – including a target for the cash rate of 0.25% and a funding facility to support credit to businesses – while continuing to monitor the effects of the pandemic on the economy.
While it is not ruling out future changes to the package "if developments in Australia and overseas warrant doing so", Lowe said the Reserve Bank board continued to view the option of negative interest rates – which has been adopted in some countries – as "extraordinarily unlikely".
Australia also would not head in the direction of intervening in the foreign exchange market, he said.
Lowe said he sometimes heard calls for the Reserve Bank to create money to finance the government – with advocates believing that if the government needed money to stimulate the economy, the central bank should simply create it in the public interest.
But he said if additional government spending funded in this way was successful in stimulating the economy, interest rates would need to be increased – otherwise inflation would rise, "perhaps to a very high level".
"In this case, it would be through the inflation tax that the community pays for the extra government spending. So there is no free lunch – the spending is just paid for in a different way," Lowe said.
Lowe said he wanted to make it "very clear that monetary financing of fiscal policy is not an option under consideration in Australia, nor does it need to be", because the Australian government could finance itself in the bond market "on vary favourable terms".
Last month the deputy governor, Guy Debelle, said there was no risk of the Australian government being unable to repay debt or of excessive inflation in the near term despite the Reserve Bank buying $40bn of government bonds.