NSW police chief vows to block Black Lives Matter protest planned for Sydney
Mick Fuller says Victoria's protests put lives at risk but state health authorities have said 'no known episodes of transmission occurred'
NSW police commissioner Mick Fuller has vowed he will go to court to block a Black Lives Matter protest planned for Sydney next week, citing the event's potential to spread coronavirus.
Fuller said rally organisers had filed a formal application for the protest but police would go to the supreme court to try and stop it from proceeding, after the event garnered more than 1,000 indications of attendance online and 3,000 expressions of interest by Monday evening.
The commissioner said regardless of the court's decision, police would "take action" if health orders were breached at the event planned for Sydney's Town Hall at noon on Tuesday 28 July.
Fuller's warning comes after police challenged the legality of several protests planned during Covid-19 restrictions. Most notably, at the beginning of June, a Black Lives Matter protest in Sydney was initially ruled unlawful before that decision was overturned on appeal, minutes before the rally was due to commence.
It ultimately drew tens of thousands of protesters.
The commissioner's comments came as NSW recorded 20 cases of Covid-19, the highest daily number in months, with 48 cases now linked to the Crossroads Hotel cluster in south-west Sydney.
Speaking to Sky News on Monday, Fuller said the protest could cause years of damage to the NSW economy if it spread Covid-19.
"It is not a time to be selfish, there are many ways you can protest, there are many ways you can go online, in forums or even through the media you can get your voice," Fuller said.
"Do you want your protest to be the one that puts NSW back five or 10 years economically because that's exactly what could happen."
The commissioner said if people breached health orders they could be fined $1,000.
Fuller separately told Sydney's 2GB radio on Monday that "we know from the Victorian (BLM) protest that it put a lot of lives at risk and it's just not worth it".
"From our perspective, it was obviously big numbers in Victoria and a number of people that came to the protest were living in those vertical towers so that certainly is enough for me," he said.
Victoria's Department of Health and Human Services, however, has told Seven News and other outlets there was no evidence linking the protest to the outbreaks at the public housing towers in North Melbourne and Flemington.
"We are aware of six confirmed cases who attended the Black Lives Matter protest," the department has said previously.
"Currently there is no evidence to suggest they acquired the virus from the protest.
"None of these cases are known to reside at a major public housing complex. Currently, no known nor suspected episodes of transmission occurred at the protest itself."
Organisers of next week's Sydney protest have instructed people not to attend if they feel unwell "or have any cold or flu-like symptoms".
On the event's Facebook page, attendees are also asked to "please wear a mask" – with supplies to be distributed on the day - and maintain "strict social distancing of 1.5m".