Nearly all coronavirus cases now in Victoria may have link to hotel quarantine, inquiry told
Inquiry to hear from government, hotels and private security providers, with first public evidence on 6 August
Government decision makers, departments, hotel operators and private security operators are on notice they will be expected to give evidence to the Victorian inquiry into the coronavirus hotel quarantine management, as the inquiry hears nearly all current cases in Victoria could be linked to hotel outbreaks.
The inquiry was launched by the state government after it was revealed that protocol breaches by security guards overseeing hotel quarantine had led to outbreaks in Victoria.
Retired judge Jennifer Coate is overseeing the inquiry, with senior assisting counsel Tony Neal.
The inquiry heard on Monday that there is evidence that many if not all of the current cases of coronavirus could be linked to the hotel outbreaks.
"Information already available to the inquiry suggests the possibility of a link between many of the cases of coronavirus identified in the Victorian community in the past few weeks, and persons who were quarantined under the hotel quarantine program," Neal said.
"Comments made by the chief health officer to the media have suggested that it might even be that every case of Covid-19 in Victoria in recent weeks, could be sourced to the hotel quarantine program."
The first public evidence will be heard commencing on 6 August, and the inquiry has already identified a number of government departments, hotel operators, and private security services that will be expected to provide evidence.
The Department of Health and Human Services; the Department of Jobs, Precincts, and Regions; the Department of Treasury and Finance; the Department of Justice and Community Safety; the Department of Environmental, Land, Water and Planning; the Department of Transport; the Department of Premier and Cabinet; Victoria Police, Emergency Management Victoria; and Ambulance Victoria have already been identified by the inquiry as of interest.
Hotel operators including Travelodge, Stamford Plaza, Rydges, Royal Melbourne hotel, Four Points by Sheraton are also of interest, as are security contractors Wilson Security, United Risk Management, Unified Security Group, Ultimate Protection Services, MSS security, Elite Protection Services, Australian Protection Group, and Security Hub.
The inquiry will look at what decisions were made to implement the hotel quarantine in its original form, who made those decisions and oversaw the implementation, decision making around contractual arrangements and the suitability of service providers under those contracts.
Neal said those interested parties had been served notices to provide relevant documents by 24 July, or 31 July if providing documents in tranches.
Witnesses expected to be called before the inquiry include medical experts, government decision makers, government officials involved in hotel quarantine, and the private operators, as well as those who were subject to quarantine and identified weaknesses in its operation.
Coate said the inquiry differed from a more adversarial court proceeding because witnesses would be brought by interested parties to bolster their case.
When asked on Monday whether he or his ministers could be called before the inquiry, the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said it was a matter for Coate, but "everyone should participate fully".
"I won't tell a former judge how to do her work. She will call whomever she thinks she needs to call. Anyone who is called should turn up," he said.
"Each party to the contest, before the court or tribunal, will bring their witnesses along and put them before the court or the tribunal to bolster the side of the case," Coate said.
"There are no sides."
The inquiry will report back to government on 25 September.
Andrews has not answered questions related to hotel quarantine since the inquiry was launched, citing that it would be inappropriate to comment while the inquiry was under way.
Andrews said he was confident the inquiry would get answers.
"I am confident that process will give us the answers that we are each entitled to. What has gone here is completely unacceptable to me and unacceptable to all of us but the best thing to do is to have that proper understanding of exactly what has gone on," he said.
"Those answers, that is what we're entitled to and that is what the judicial process, at arm's length from government, will appropriately deliver."