'Give us a shout': New Zealand deputy PM offers to help Australia with Covid-19 outbreak
Winston Peters says he regrets how virus has got 'out of control' across the Tasman, causing delays to proposed travel bubble
Winston Peters, New Zealand's deputy prime minister, has voiced his anger at the "looseness" of Australia's leaders in handing the latest coronavirus outbreaks, and offered to give Victoria the benefit of Kiwi experience in fighting Covid-19.
"I am looking at the premiers of the states in Australia, at Scott Morrison and I feel a great deal of regret that looseness allowed this thing to get out of control in my view, in Australia," Peters told the Today Show on Friday.
"I do hope you get on top of things in Melbourne. It's a great state but boy ... what can I say. If we can help, give us a shout."
Victoria endured another record day of new coronavirus cases on Friday, with more than 428 people diagnosed and three deaths. The premier, Daniel Andrews, said on Friday that 370 of the new cases discovered over the past 24 hours were under investigation, while 57 were connected to known outbreaks.
The fresh outbreak has further delayed long-mooted plans for a trans-Tasman travel bubble between Australia and New Zealand.
However, Peters raised the possibility of bubble between Tasmania and Auckland, claiming he had told the state premier, Peter Gutwein, that his state was "set to go" and urged him to push for clearance.
"Tasmania has got it better than New Zealand," he said.
The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, discussed arrangements with his counterpart, Jacinda Ardern, last week following a meeting of Australia's national cabinet, where the Victorian coronavirus outbreak was canvassed at length.
"I spoke to Prime Minister Ardern on Friday evening and she raised that very issue with me and we're progressing those discussions," he told 3AW radio. "Obviously it's got to be a little bit moderated for what's happening in Victoria, but we discussed it at national cabinet last Friday, so we're working with the states and territories about how they can participate in that."
Regular travel between the two nations has been suspended during the coronavirus pandemic. Late last month, Ardern said the reopening of borders would come down to Australia's leaders.
"Ultimately it's up to Australia to decide whether or not they'll go for a whole-of-country approach, or a state-by-state approach," she said at the time. "Obviously where there is community outbreak that is a no-go for New Zealand.
"Where they have border controls in place and where they've had no community transmissions for sustained periods of time that may be a different scenario."
This story was amended on 20 July 2020 to correct the name of the Tasmanian premier.