Restaurants on footpaths: why Australia's indoor gatherings should be pushed outside in the Covid-19 era
Doctors and businesses are backing novel ideas such as opening up public spaces and car parks to small retailers
Allowing restaurants and cafes to spread their tables on to footpaths, and opening up public green spaces and car parks to small retailers are some of the suggestions epidemiologists and corporate leaders are making as indoor gatherings continue to pose the greatest coronavirus risk in the coming months.
Consideration of how businesses can continue to safely operate even as suburbs and cities experience outbreaks comes as leaders call for businesses based in high-risk settings, particularly indoor shops and restaurants, to be allowed to innovate their operations, which they hope will mean wide-scale lockdowns can be avoided while maintaining activity.
The suggestions for safe operation of traditionally indoor businesses – which would allow businesses that would otherwise be limited to a handful of customers to welcome more clients safely – have been backed by the Sydney Business Chamber executive director, Katherine O'Regan, who told Guardian Australia there was a social and economic benefit to spreading businesses outdoors.
"If there's a way we can start to allow these small businesses, especially around dining and bars, to spill out into the footpath and streets, we should be looking at it, because this can be how those businesses stay alive," O'Regan says.
In supporting the push outside, Marylouise McLaws, a professor of epidemiology at the University of New South Wales who has examined behaviour at pubs and restaurants, argues indoor venues that play music and force patrons to talk louder – which projects particle spread – pose one of the greatest risks for virus spread.
Public health experts also advocate for the use of face shields, not masks, by all hospitality workers, as an important protection against the virus but also to send a visual message to patrons the pandemic is still ongoing.
The move on Friday by the NSW government to limit group booking in restaurants and all indoor hospitality venues to 10 people from the end of next week came after the state announced marshals would enforce capacity limits, social distancing and contact data recording at all pubs to avoid the Crossroads hotel cluster spiralling into Melbourne-style widespread lockdowns.
"Indoor activities are the greatest threat in spreading the disease ... we know [they] act as a catalyst," the NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, said on Friday.
While Victoria's chief health officer, Brett Sutton, suggested elimination as a strategy for his state, Scott Morrison reaffirmed a suppression approach, citing the prohibitive cost of elimination on the economy.
Innes Willox, the chief executive of national employer association Australian Industry Group, said on Thursday "the costs of going down this route would be far greater than the extra benefits of seeking complete elimination".
In an earlier interview with the ABC, he said "if you have an outbreak in a pub, for instance, do you just deal with what's going on in the pub and that environment, or as the temptation is, is to implement much broader lockdowns across the whole community, which will undoubtedly have a huge economic and social impact".
Willox's view was backed by the Business Council of Australia chief executive, Jennifer Westacott, and Flight Centre's CEO, Graham Turner, who called for national policy certainty and deplored the cost of blanket lockdowns.
Peter Collignon, a professor of infectious diseases at the Australian National University, sympathises with the calls for certainty from the business sector, but says Australia needs to be more cautious than countries such as Sweden, which have seen leading cases of per capita deaths among older segments of the population.
"My view is we're going to have restrictions for at least two years, Collignon says.
Noting health outcomes should take priority, Collignon also mentions the Quality Adjusted Life Years measure, used to estimate quality of life benefits in economic evaluations, and points out that economic considerations routinely influence medical decisions for spending on drug trials and procedures such as dialysis.
Collignon says a strategy of "longer-term suppression", and not extended lockdowns to achieve elimination, would allow businesses to operate with restrictions even when clusters emerge nearby.
He points to high transmission rates in European and American cities in winter, as well as more recent spikes in Arizona and hotter climates, as indications that being indoors for either eating or air-conditioning had led to greater spread of Covid-19.
"What's clear is being outdoors is safer, which Australia has a big advantage in terms of weather. But in winter heaters can be used ... To my mind there's no doubt the biggest factor in spread is being indoors and closer than 1.5 metres with lots of people."
Collignon says restaurants, bars and cafes should be allowed to seat patrons outside, as the virus cannot travel as well in open air, and that staff should wear a perspex face shield – which he says is more effective in preventing droplet spread.
He also says limiting group numbers per table is key, so when cases are identified, they can be treated like "spot fires".
On tourism, Collignon says if indoor gatherings and shops are able to move outdoors, interstate and intrastate travel could be done safely during times of outbreaks, as the potential for spread is limited if indoor settings aren't crowded. But this would need to include travellers spreading out and not congregating in the same cities and hotels.
However, he says any measures have to occur alongside a consistent testing and tracing regime, and that ultimately, Australians need to get used to being in crowds less, and less options of venues to visit.
McLaws, the professor of epidemiology at the University of NSW who has advocated for an eradication strategy, says understanding why indoor venues pose a greater risk, and ensuring the public remain on alert, are important for businesses certainty.
"This virus loves indoors, people standing close together, the sharing of air in an enclosed space. And that's all affected by disinhibition from alcohol in pubs and some restaurants," McLaws says.
She says pubs and restaurants which play music also present a unique risk.
"That's probably one reason the virus has spread between groups in pubs, because the louder you speak the more particles you spread out," she says, adding she has studied the concept on a particle sizer for a previous virus and that "it stands to reason its the same for Covid-19".
"Allowing these businesses to be outdoors makes such a difference because of constant air change. Air change per hour in hospitals is so important it's regulated."
McLaws also says hospitality workers using face shields, and encouraging mask use among the public, is not only a safety measure, but would send a visual message to the public that Covid-19 is still a threat despite the relatively well-managed first wave.
In Sydney, a city with an economic output of $461.4bn in 2018/19, or 24.1% of Australia's GDP, O'Regan says the biggest hurdle in allowing indoor businesses to operate outside is traffic management and council approval.
"We've got to make it easy for businesses [to operate on the footpaths], and while some councils have embraced it, we need to look at ways of speeding it up so businesses owners aren't filling out a million forms.
"These public spaces – laneways, car parks and green spaces – can and should be able to be used by businesses, including retailers, not just to help them stay alive, but also for people to be able to stay connected."
O'Regan says food businesses have already adapted to focusing solely on takeaways earlier on in the pandemic, and are willing to do what is necessary to operate safely.
"Certainty is definitely key for any business and providing an element of certainty as to what they need to do to be safe is just as important as providing certainty to customers," she says.