'We don't know how many timebombs are ticking': Australia's rent deferral debt trap
Bureaucrats, agents and even tenant advocates say no one knows how many renters are running up debts under Covid-19 regulations
Renters are facing a financial timebomb in September when state protections against eviction are due to expire and many could be asked to repay deferred rent or begin paying their full rent again.
But no one has a clear idea how big the problem might be or what effect it could have on the economy and the property market.
All states have implemented moratoriums on evictions until late September and some have schemes to help landlords and tenants negotiate rental reductions for people whose income is affected by the Covid-19 slowdown.
Some states, like Victoria, have offered grants of $2,000 to renters to help them.
But there is anecdotal evidence that some renters are finding that they thought they had negotiated a cut only to find that the landlord had offered a deferral and they now have a debt.
Labor asked several bureaucrats at a Senate hearing into homelessness last week about the extent of rental debt, but neither the head of social security, Shane Bennett, nor the Bureau of Statistics could cast any light on what proportion of renters were accruing a liability, how many were behind in their rent and how many had managed to negotiate a cut.
"We don't know how many people are behind in their rent and whether, when the eviction freeze ends, we are going to have a lot of people with a massive debt that they can't repay," Labor's spokesman on housing, Jason Clare, said.
"The national cabinet needs to find out quickly how many people are in this situation and work out what, if anything, needs to be done."
Guardian Australia contacted tenants' unions and the real estate institutes of the three eastern states, but they too had only limited data and were unsure how many tenants had negotiated a deferral or secured a temporary cut in their rents.
The only exception was Queensland's Real Estate Institute which has surveyed its 1,200 agencies with property management businesses and found that only 6.05% of residential rental tenants had qualified as "Covid-19 impacted" under the state government's Covid-19 emergency response regulation.
However, property managers had negotiated an additional 14% of temporary rent reduction requests beyond the regulation, representing more than 10,800 residential tenancies.
The bulk of these temporary rent reduction reviews took place across Brisbane (37.2%), Gold Coast (14.88%), Sunshine Coast (12.09%) and Cairns (6.51%) with the majority of tenants requiring a rent reduction of up to $100 per week (69.3%).
The survey did not say whether these temporary reductions were done as a deferral (and repayable) or as rent relief.
"I do know that agents are pushing for deferrals," said Penny Carr, the CEO of Tenants Queensland.
But she added: "We don't know how many timebombs are ticking along."
Queensland has a system where Covid-affected tenants can seek mediation before a tribunal, but Carr said some of the rent reductions are still leaving tenants with 50% of their income going towards rent.
Victoria also implemented a mediation system for renters. Leah Calman, president of the Real Estate Institute Victoria said 85% had been temporary rent reductions but there had been some deferrals of rent as well.
But she said there were also examples of tenants who had simply stopped paying their rent. "Those owners are in terrible distress," she said.
Exactly what will happen in October when most of the states' moratoriums on evictions end remains to be seen.
The 60-day stop on landlords filing for evictions in NSW ended on 14 June and there was an immediate jump in the numbers of cases being filed in the NSW civil and administrative tribunal (NCAT).
In the last two weeks of June, 784 applications were filed, compared with 554 in the two prior weeks. The moratorium on evictions for Covid-affected tenancies continues until the end of September.
Authorities are particularly concerned about the impact that rising homelessness or accommodation uncertainty could have on their ability to deal with the spread of Covid -19.
NSW Tenants Union policy coordinator, Jemima Mowbray said they were hearing increased stories of people couch-surfing or returning to live with family because they just couldn't afford the rent.
She said that the constant negotiations with real estate agents were also adding to levels of stress, particularly as tenants were often inexperienced at negotiation.
The so-called "rent bomb" will come at the same time as likely changes to the jobkeeper and jobseeker support, although the government appears to be keen to avoid a financial cliff by ending the support too abruptly in September. The treasurer will outline further support on 23 July.
Vanessa, who lives in Brunswick in Melbourne, is an example of the type of stresses that renters are facing. She asked not to use her surname.
When the first lockdown occurred in March, her job in hospitality stopped abruptly. Faced with a significant fall in their joint income she and her partner approached the real estate agent for rent relief.
They proposed a 20% reduction in rent for three to four months, but were offered only a rental deferral, of $400 a month until September.
"The process was really slow. We had to fill out a hardship form and it asked all sorts of questions. They didn't ask us directly about our super, but they wanted to know everything about our finances."
By the time six weeks had elapsed, Vanessa had managed to get jobkeeper and was back full time, so the couple decided not to take up the deferral.
But she says the latest lockdown has created further uncertainty for their household income.
The couple are hoping that, come October, when their lease is due to be renewed they can negotiate a better rent, or they may decide to move.
"We've been here three and a half years so we would like to stay, but we can get a property with the same amenity much, much cheaper," Vanessa said.
Rents in both inner Melbourne and inner Sydney have been dropping sharply, thanks to Covid-19.
The Real Estate Institute of NSW (REINSW) Vacancy Rate Survey results for June 2020 showed that vacancies in Sydney increased for the fourth consecutive month and now sit at 4.5%, up 0.4% from May and 1.5% since March.
"Sydney's inner ring experienced the most significant change, rising 0.8% to 5.8%," REINSW CEO Tim McKibbin said.
The middle ring also increased, with a 0.6% rise to 4.6%, though in Sydney's outer ring vacancies are decreasing , perhaps reflecting an influx toward cheaper suburbs.
In May, vacancies in the inner ring hit an 18-year high at 5.1% – a result that has been exceeded in June and shows no signs of abating yet.
"Looking back at more than 20 years of survey results, we've not seen vacancy rates this high. It really is staggering," McKibbin said.
"The falls in rental rates that will inevitably follow could help tenants but could be a disaster for many landlords."
Leanne Pilkington, president of the REINSW said that she believed deferrals of rent were the minority, not the majority and that most were negotiating rent reductions, often on a month-by-month basis.
She also said a number of tenants were also opting to break their leases and move somewhere cheaper.