Coronavirus Australia latest: the week at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Luke Henriques-Gomes and it's Friday 17 July.
The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, warned the state government may have to consider tougher restrictions if case numbers did not fall. The 428 cases reported on Friday was a record, topping the previous high of 317 infections discovered the previous day. The state's death toll reached 32. Health advice encouraging mask use in Melbourne was also extended to include regional Victoria. Speculation was rife about the prospect of a "stage four" lockdown, although no details were confirmed.
The Guardian reported that 150 hospital workers were in isolation due to outbreaks among staff at healthcare facilities in Melbourne, though Victorian authorities dodged questions about surge capacity in hospitals. There is also increasing concern about the spread of the virus in Melbourne aged care homes, with more than 30 facilities affected.
The New South Wales government said it would restrict all indoor venues – including pubs, clubs, restaurants and cafes – from bookings of more than 10 people. It came after more than 40 cases were linked to Sydney's Crossroads Hotel. Another case was identified at Star casino, which was fined $5,000 for breaching Covid-19 rules. The premier, Gladys Berejiklian, said NSW was in a state of "high alert", but said her preference was against the imposition of another lockdown, even as cases continued to rise slightly.
Queensland police intercepted more than 43,000 vehicles and turned away 1,143 at the border with New South Wales, and authorities have constructed a 700-metre border wall at Coolangatta. Long delays for motorists looking to cross the state border there are expected to last for months. Also this week, South Australia announced it would maintain border restrictions with NSW, as did the NT, while Queensland banned people from entering the state if they had visited "hot spots" in Sydney. All states have already closed their borders to Victorians.
Scott Morrison sounded an optimistic tone about the Australian economy, despite new figures showing that unemployment hit 7.4% in June, up from 7.1% in May. However, total employment increased by 210,800 in the month, driven by an increase in part-time jobs, while underemployment also fell.
The NZ government was unhappy with Australia's decision to resume deportations given the ongoing Covid-19 crisis. NZ, which has essentially eliminated Covid-19 within the country, was preparing a special quarantine hotel to take about 30 detainees.
More jobs were cut in the university sector, which has been mostly excluded from the jobkeeper wage subsidy. The University of New South Wales announced it would cut nearly 500 jobs earlier in the week, while Monash University followed suit a few days later with plans to axe 277 positions.
The Queensland government suggested it should be gifted the AFL grand final after it agreed to host all Victorian-based teams to keep the season alive. Teams that had been based in Sydney were forced to move amid increased community transmission within the NSW capital. The AFL chief executive, Gillon McLachlan, said at this stage the grand final would still be held at the MCG.
As uncertainty continued over the future scope of the jobseeker and jobkeeper programs, the government announced the unsubtly titled 'jobtrainer' package. It promised to commit $500m to extend and expand existing wage subsidies for trainees and apprenticeships, providing the states matched that contribution.
New figures showed super funds received more than 340,000 applications in three days from people who wanted to make a second withdrawal from their superannuation accounts. The withdrawals are allowed as part of new rules passed in response to the coronavirus recession.
Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian's global network.