Monash University to cut 277 jobs as slump in international students bites
Announcement comes a day after University of NSW slashed 493 jobs as higher education sector reels from coronavirus impact
Monash University has revealed it will cut 277 jobs due to a projected $350m revenue shortfall in 2020, as international student revenue declines hit university bottom lines.
The announcement on Thursday is the latest in a series of job cuts triggered by an estimated $16bn loss of revenue due to Covid-19, and follows the loss of 493 jobs at the University of New South Wales.
In a statement, Monash University said a variation in its workplace deal with the National Tertiary Education Union had allowed it to save 190 jobs by measures including cutting bonuses and delaying pay increases until 2021. Senior management has also taken a 20% pay cut.
"Job losses are an unfortunate result of the Covid-19 global health crisis across many industries," the university said.
"They will continue to be a reality without further government support in particular for research. At this stage, for Monash, there will be a loss of 277 jobs by the end of the year.
"Monash is projecting a $350m revenue shortfall for 2020 and has implemented a range of non-salary reductions to deal with this loss."
The Monash vice-chancellor and Group of Eight universities interim chair, Margaret Gardner, said on Thursday the group expected to cut 2,000 jobs and lose more than $2bn in revenue in the next couple of years.
"It is happening across most universities, and in particular in the Group of Eight, which are research-intensive, have higher income from overseas students [and high spending] on teaching and research … the impact of the downturn in revenue has been severe," she told ABC TV.
Gardner said that "significant losses" could not be minimised "without assistance".
The Morrison government has guaranteed its $18bn contribution to universities, but refused to kick in extra, while also making a series of changes effectively excluding public universities from the jobkeeper wage subsidy scheme.
In June, the education minister, Dan Tehan, unveiled proposed changes reducing the overall government contribution to degrees from 58% to 52% and increasing fees for some courses to pay for 39,000 extra university places. UNSW estimated the changes would hurt its budget position by $30-40m.
Gardner said the university sector was still in negotiations with the government about the future of research funding and noted that Tehan had guaranteed a $705m transition fund would ensure funding for domestic students is not reduced in the first three years of the new funding model.
On Wednesday, the UNSW vice-chancellor, Ian Jacobs, revealed the university was currently facing a $370m financial shortfall in 2021 which can be reduced to $75m with cost-cutting and dipping into reserves but would still require it to reduce its workforce by 493 full-time positions.