Coronavirus Australia: Victoria reports 317 new Covid-19 cases and two deaths as NSW records 10 cases
Premier Daniel Andrews announces a new daily record for the state but says there are no plans for stage 4 restrictions
Victoria has recorded 317 new cases of Covid-19 on Thursday – a new daily record – and two people have died in the state.
Daniel Andrews announced on Thursday morning that two men, both in their 80s, had died overnight as Victoria recorded its highest recorded daily total for new cases. The premier said that despite rumours circulating online, there would be no immediate announcement of stage four restrictions.
"We have to stay the course on this, we have to keep following those rules," he said. "I know there's been a lot of discussion, a lot written and said about possible stage four: there are no announcements to be made about that today.
"That shouldn't be read to mean there will be announcements made tomorrow. We plan for every single contingency."
The 317 cases came from 28,607 tests conducted. In the peak of the first wave, on 28 March, the Australia-wide total was 469 cases reported in a single day.
In New South Wales, 10 new cases were reported, from more than 22,000 tests taken since Wednesday.
Six of those were locally acquired. Three were from the Crossroads hotel in south-western Sydney and three remained under investigation on Thursday.
NSW's chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said the three cases linked to the Crossroads hotel were a child of a person with Covid-19, a close contact of someone who had visited the pub, and a man in his 80s who had attended the pub on 5 July.
She also said there were two new cases linked to the Hurricane's Grill at Brighton-Le-Sands. A person who was later diagnosed with coronavirus visited the restaurant on 11 July between 6pm and 8pm.
"One of the cases was infectious when they attended it and one of the party acquired the infection there," Chant said.
The restaurant is now closed for cleaning.
Andrews said 28 of Victoria's new cases were connected to known outbreaks, with 289 were still under investigation. The state now has 2,128 people who are considered active cases.
"We're seeing relative stability to these numbers," he said. "We have made the point, with these stay-at-home restrictions only a week old, it will take some time to bring stability to the numbers and start to see a pattern where they are driven down."
Victoria's chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, said: "The idea that 29 deaths is nothing, and that we can lift all restrictions and that we can let it run, is absurd. It's an exponential growth in cases when there aren't restrictions in place ... If we don't do it, it will be hundreds or thousands of deaths."
He announced there were now 157 cases linked to Al-Taqwa college, six cases linked to HWL Ebsworth lawyers in Melbourne, 37 cases linked to Somerville retail services in Tottenham, 31 cases linked to Menarock aged-care facility in Essendon, five cases linked to St Basil's Homes for the Aged in Fawkner, 23 cases linked to Glendale aged care in Werribee, 21 cases listed to Estia Health aged care, and 29 cases linked to the JBS abattoir in Brooklyn.
But Sutton said the Victorian cases were not showing exponential growth.
"The number of nominated close contacts is much less than it was a week or two weeks ago, when it was five or six individuals. It's heading down towards one. They're all good signs. I expect that we can turn this around. If it's not turning around, I know we'll do whatever is required to make it so."
The number of seriously unwell cases has also jumped, with 109 patients now in hospital and 29 people in intensive care.
The state's health minister, Jenny Mikakaos, announced the creation of a new hospital building with 84 beds, to safeguard against a surge in Covid-19 hospitalisations.
"The old Peter Mac hospital was one of [the surge capacity] projects," she said. "This has been a $30m project to recommission 84 additional beds that are now available to our hospital system. That will now be called St Vincent's on the Park. Those beds will be managed by St Vincent's hospital, given the proximity to their main campus."
Mikakos also announced that public hospitals would be asked to reduce their elective surgery capacity to 50% and private hospitals to 75%.