Coronavirus: campaign launched offering help to those self-isolating
As part of #viralkindess campaign the public can print and share cards listing their services
As coronavirus engulfs the world, with increasing numbers putting themselves in self-isolation as a response to the growing pandemic, it is easy to become swept up in the doom and gloom.
But some kind-hearted people are shrugging off the sense of apocalypse by offering to lend a helping hand to those in need, notifying them by dropping leaflets through their letterboxes as dozens of "mutual aid" groups spring up across the UK.
Eighty-seven groups have been formed across the country to offer practical support for those in self-isolation, as well as phone calls. Volunteers are organising WhatsApp and Facebook groups, and are holding meetings online alongside distributing flyers in the street.
Anna Vickerstaff, one of the coordinators of the national Covid-19 Mutual Aid UK network, said: "No matter what we look like, where we live, or how much money we have, getting sick reminds us that at our core we're all just human.
"And in every country it's the old, the sick and those already struggling who will be affected worse. That's why we set this network up – because we want to make sure that no one in our communities is being left to face this crisis alone, and because we want to try and redress some of the serious inequalities this outbreak will expose."
The groups follow a #viralkindness campaign where postcards bearing the message "Hello! If you are self-isolating, I can help" are being dropped at doorsteps across the UK with the idea already spreading as far as Australia.
The cards, which are available to download online so people can print them at home, include boxes for neighbours to write their name, address, phone number and state whether volunteers can help with picking up shopping, urgent supplies, posting mail or even just "a friendly phone call".
It comes as the number of confirmed coronavirus cases in the UK reached over 1,000 on Saturday, with the government advising anyone showing symptoms – including a cough or high temperature – to self-isolate at home for seven days. People with mild symptoms are not being tested.
The postcard idea was conceived by Becky Wass, a lecturer in Cornwall who said she felt helpless by the pandemic and was compelled to do something to combat it. Wass, an associate lecturer in creative advertising at Falmouth University, told Cornwall Live: "I was talking to my husband John about how the news was quite hard-hitting and there wasn't much we could actually do to make a positive difference."
Wass, 32, added: "If just one person feels less lonely or isolated when faced with this pandemic, then I'll feel better about it. Coronavirus is scary. Let's make kindness go viral."
She wrote on her Facebook page on Thursday evening: "I've been feeling pretty helpless watching the news. Maybe you have too? I wanted to do something about it, so I've made a postcard that I'll be posting to my older neighbours as this progresses (after washing my hands!).
"If just one person feels less lonely or isolated when faced with this pandemic, then I'll feel better about it (I hope!) Coronavirus is scary. Let's make kindness go viral. Feel free to share/print/use."
Polly Cox, who runs a post office store in Wiltshire, is also posting leaflets to neighbours in order to "reach out to the vulnerable people in our community" who are self-isolating or cautious about going outside. She told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: "We're buddying up people so those who already know elderly people or people who are at more higher risk, if they already know them then we're pairing them up. And we're making sure that people have regular contact and just reach out to people really and reassure them that we're all in it together.
"Already we've had a brilliant reaction. We've got a neighbourhood watch WhatsApp group and a village WhatsApp group so people have already been messaging me saying they know so-and-so or they'll check in on this household and so already we're building up a good list of names of people who can help. Other people have offered to drive if they need to."
Meanwhile, in Brighton the community spirit is also thriving as locals rally round to help the vulnerable. A Covid-19 mutual aid group on Facebook is connecting people who need help with food shopping, picking up prescriptions or even dog-walking. Within 24 hours of it being set up on Friday, the group swelled to more than 600 members who have already set about distributing flyers offering help.
Sussex University lecturer Dr Andrea Brock, 33, who came up with the idea with her friend, said: "It can be incredibly isolating to be in your house for weeks. We are used to this idea that asking for help is a bad thing and that is not something we are encouraged to do.
"So we are setting up this group so people can ask for help and they can ask for support. The fact that this works shows that people want to help each other."