Food banks run out of milk and other staples as shoppers panic-buy
Charities struggling for supplies urge people to think before coronavirus stockpiling
Food banks in Britain are running out of staples including milk and cereal as a result of panic-buying and are urging shoppers to think twice before hoarding as donations fall in the coronavirus outbreak.
Donations from shoppers at branches of Sainsbury's and Waitrose slumped to 25% of their normal volume at one food bank in London, while they have fallen by a third at a Kirkcaldy food bank – where UHT milk has run out. Some facilities have warned they may close because of concerns about cross-infection, and a food bank in Stonebridge, a deprived area of north-west London, will cut the size of its food parcels by a third from Wednesday, with larger families facing the biggest reductions.
"Panic is going to be more dangerous than the virus," said Joyce Leggate, the chair of Kirkcaldy food bank, which helps up to 350 families a week. "Our food parcels are essential for the health of many of the people we support. The food can be a lifeline. Please, if you are stockpiling, have a look and say: 'Am I really going to use this?' If not, is there someone who needs it more?"
Organisers in Fife, Liverpool and Leicester have reported the unavailability of UHT milk, a key part of their food parcels to keep young children and expecting mothers healthy.
Food bank users are already noticing the impact. Over the weekend, one tweeted in response to a post about panic-buying: "If you're lucky enough to have a few £££ left at the end of your food shop then please consider buying food or hygiene products to donate to foodbanks."
Food banks in the UK gave out more than 1.6m parcels last year, based on figures for the Trussell Trust, which has 428 food banks in its network. Independent food banks typically rely on donations of food and money, using the cash to top up supplies by placing orders at supermarkets. Many have found that panic-buying by the public has made it impossible to buy the volumes of the staples they need, including tinned fish.
"Emergency food aid providers across the UK are already stretched to the limit and the impact of the spread of coronavirus can only make matters worse," said Sabine Goodwin, the coordinator of the Independent Food Aid Network, which represents 189 food banks. "[They] cannot be expected to support yet more people needing help if schools are closed and those depending on insecure work are forced to rely on charity if taken ill or self-isolating."
Frank Field, the former MP for Birkenhead and veteran anti-poverty campaigner, called on Tuesday for "each of us to reflect on whether that extra packet of pasta really is necessary for ourselves, or whether instead we can donate it to help families who are hungry now".
Field, who chairs the charity Feeding Britain, which runs food poverty schemes in 12 areas of England, also called on the government to reduce the need for food banks – through the swift payment of universal credit and continuing to support free school dinners.
Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, told parliament on Monday that self-employed and gig economy workers who stand to lose their incomes if they have to self-isolate "can apply for universal credit or new-style employment and support allowance and advances are available for universal credit immediately".
Paul O'Brien, who runs the Micah Liverpool food bank, which helps feed more than 200 people a week, said: "We are struggling to get UHT milk and breakfast cereals, which are basics in our food parcels. On Monday, our driver has been speaking to [supermarket] store managers explaining why we want to buy in bulk and he is getting no luck."
"People's concerns are elsewhere," said James Quayle, the manager at North Paddington food bank in London, where donations are down to 25% of their normal volume. "It shows the safety net created by our food banks is very thin. The system is not very sustainable. This is another sign that more vulnerable people stand to be worse affected by coronavirus."
Quayle's charity has increased its spending on food from £600 to £800 a week to try to compensate for the slump in donations.
Rajesh Makwana, the coordinator of the Sufra NW London food bank, said it may have to close to prevent cross-infection of users and is considering whether it can deliver parcels instead. He said users include refugees with connections to Iran or who have passed through Italy.
Robin Burgess, who runs the Hope Food Centre in Northampton, which feeds lunch to 130 homeless people daily, said it is making preparations to close in the event of stricter rules from public health authorities about people mixing.
"We are teetering on the edge of banning communal gatherings," Burgess said. "We are thinking about possibly using a car park with a marquee where people can get food and go away."
