Coronavirus death: family pay tribute to 'wonderful person'
Family of 83-year-old who died on Thursday after returning from a cruise are now self-isolating
The family of the man who died in Milton Keynes after contracting coronavirus have paid tribute to a "truly loving and wonderful person".
Milton Keynes University Hospital NHS Foundation trust said the man, who had recently returned from a Caribbean cruise, tested positive for coronavirus shortly before his death on Thursday.
On Saturday, the family released a statement about the man, who they have asked not to be named.
The statement said: "We as a family have lost a truly loving and wonderful person and are trying to come to terms with this. He was 83 years old and a wonderful husband, dad, grandad and great-grandad who would go to any lengths to support and protect his family."
The family said he was admitted to hospital on Monday and, after observations, the decision was made to remove him from the ward as a precaution to carry out more intensive tests.
On Thursday evening it was confirmed he tested positive for coronavirus. He died shortly afterwards with his family beside him.
The family said the cause of death has not yet been confirmed, despite the diagnosis.
In the statement, the family also confirmed that they have been tested and told to self-isolate as a precaution.
The statement continued: "This whole nightmare is not something that we or our loved one asked for. As we are in isolation currently, we cannot arrange for him to be put to rest and with all the activity that is going around with regards to everyone's concerns, we cannot grieve him as we would wish to."
The hospital also released a statement following reports that the family were concerned about the man's treatment and how long he had stayed on the ward despite presenting with symptoms of coronavirus before his diagnosis was confirmed.
The statement said: "We can assure local people that we have followed, and continue to follow, all national guidance on the identification and management of patients with suspected Covid-19. This includes when to test and when to isolate patients as a precaution against the possible spread of infection. Guidance changes week to week given the evolving nature of Covid-19 in England, and we keep abreast of all updates.
"We have stringent infection control protocols in place; and are working closely with national agencies, including Public Health England, to ensure we are doing everything possible to safeguard all those using the hospital at all times."
The hospital added that it was also supporting PHE in extensive contact tracing to identify those people who may have been in close contact with the patient who tested positive for Covid-19.