Battling coronavirus misinformation in the age of social media
Myths and falsehoods spreading quicker than officials can provide updates
Public health professionals trying to provide the nation with facts about the spread of coronavirus are battling a wave of misinformation, as they wrestle with the first major British health crisis of the smartphone era.
Officials are providing regular updates to the media on the spread of the infection, but at the same time half-truths about the best way to treat the illness are already going viral on WhatsApp and other messaging services.
Some are suggesting dubious herbal remedies, while one viral message – which claims to be advice from an uncle who is a Chinese doctor – mixes standard best practice with unverified claims about how best to kill the germs.
While the inherently private nature of WhatsApp makes it hard to track the spread of such material or judge how many people are reading it, some of the posts seen by the Guardian use the standard language of internet chain letters and urge people to forward the advice to friends and family – circumventing the official health communications in the same manner that has allowed anti-vaccination movements to flourish online.
Prof David Harper, a former chief scientist at the Department of Health, said the UK's established communications strategy for a public health crisis is to have a trusted medical figure rather than a politician deliver regular updates to the public.
He said this approach worked well during the 2009 influenza pandemic: "It was decided early on that the designated person would be very visible even if there was very little to say. If no one is saying anything then it becomes a cause of concern. It's much better to be visible and be seen by the public, even if it's just to repeat what's been said or say there's not been much change."
Harper, now a fellow at Chatham House, said there is some risk that people become "desensitised" if they are provided with too much information on how many people have been infected without sufficient context, but that transparency improved public trust.
A decade on this approach is being challenged by the radically changed media environment. Major social networks, aware of past criticism of their role in spreading untruths and hysteria over health issues, have moved to get ahead of the problem and are actively engaging with the UK government to provide information.
Both Facebook and Twitter are promoting official NHS guidance, providing links to NHS advice in users' feeds and when they search for coronavirus-related terms. Google, often the first port of call for health advice, is promoting official advice.
The BBC, having spent recent months being attacked and stonewalled by the government, is emphasising its role in disseminating accurate, timely information about public health issues, with a spokesperson pushing the fact its coverage reaches millions of Britons with official guidance.
"We know the public turns to the BBC at times like this," said a spokesperson, pointing out that nine of the corporation's 10 most-read stories online during the past week were about the virus. Also highlighted was the decision to make a special public information programme on the outbreak on Monday night.
For a government that has put great weight on bypassing traditional media outlets, the outbreak has forced it to reconsider its relationship with the broadcaster. On Saturday a government minister was heard giving an interview on Radio 4's Today programme for the first time since the general election, breaking a No 10-imposed boycott to deliver an update to the programmes's millions of listeners. And on Tuesday health secretary Matt Hancock appeared on the same programme ahead of the publication of the government's so-called 'battleplan' to combat the spread of the virus.
Lord Kerslake, a former head of the civil service, said he still believed the government's communications efforts were insufficient, and had been damaged by political boycotts of Today and ITV's Good Morning Britain. "You are reliant on communications in these situations, and need every media outlet necessary. You certainly shouldn't be boycotting programmes, frankly that's pretty feeble," he said.
Kerslake added that not enough ministers had appeared in the media to support Hancock, who has been leading communications efforts on coronavirus almost single-handedly in the past few days. "No criticism of Hancock, but if I was him, I'd want a bit more back-up."
Harper, the former Whitehall official, accepted that Boris Johnson's decision to call a meeting of the emergency planning committee Cobra may be partly for media consumption. But he said it also helps reassure the public about the seriousness of the issue: "In this case, the prime minister is seen to be in control. It is important that the machinery and the accountability for taking the decisions are seen. We have to be careful not to be too hung up on who's doing what at what point."
Additional reporting by Elle Hunt.