'MPs should be role models': Gove and Truss face-off stirs mask debate
Pret a Manger customers respond after ministers took opposite approaches while at food chain
After facing an accusation that ministers were in a "complete muddle" over plans to make face coverings mandatory in shops, they were images that Downing Street could have done without.
Pictured leaving the same Pret a Manger in Westminster on Tuesday morning, eight minutes apart, the cabinet minister Liz Truss donned a face mask whereas her colleague Michael Gove did not.
The health secretary, Matt Hancock, who only hours after the images were captured announced in parliament that face coverings would be mandatory in England from next Friday, sought to downplay the confusion caused by the contrasting images of his fellow ministers when asked about it on Wednesday.
But in an apparent about-turn on Wednesday morning, it appears Gove decided to wear a mask when he went to the same Pret. A witness said the Cabinet Office minister wore an NHS-branded face covering when ordering a coffee. Gove was also snapped wearing a mask when arriving at the Cabinet Office later on Wednesday.
A source close to Gove confirmed he wore the mask on a visit to the coffee chain on Wednesday morning but declined to comment on Tuesday's picture.
The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, also chose Wednesday to pop to Pret in a face mask. He tweeted that he had done so to make the most of price cuts after the VAT reduction for the tourism and hospitality sectors.
But customers had mixed views on the issue at the Pret in Westminster on Wednesday. Some of those grabbing takeaway coffees seemed to be following Gove's earlier lead by not wearing masks, whereas others decided to use them even though new rules regarding fines have not yet come into effect.
Nadeem Khan, 36, and his friend Mati Ullah, 32, both investment bankers visiting London from Dubai for a business property deal, wore masks when getting takeaway drinks at lunchtime.
Asked about the different images of Gove and Truss, Khan – who supports masks being mandatory in shops – said: "It conveys the mood of government, or we can say hypocrisy of the government, because they are public faces and people look up to them. They should be role models, in a way. They should set an example to follow.
"We're not against any government – it's just a message we want to put across. We have to fight the battle together. It's everyone's responsibility."
Khan, who said he had been wearing a mask in shops for the past two months, added: "It's not about myself, I can take care of myself, but if because of me someone else is affected that's not right."
On Wednesday morning, in response to a suggestion that the images of Gove and Truss had sown confusion, Hancock told Sky News: "This picture was before we'd announced the change in the policy. I announced that change in the policy in the House of Commons yesterday."
Asked explicitly if from 24 July somebody would have to wear a mask at Pret a Manger, Hancock said: "You do need to wear a face mask in Pret because Pret is a shop."
However, adding to the apparent confusion over the plans, the prime minister's spokesman said later on Wednesday: "My understanding is that it wouldn't be mandatory if you went in, for example, to a sandwich shop in order to get a takeaway, to wear a face covering. Where it is mandatory we're talking about supermarkets and other shops."
Full guidance is due to be published, he added. Asked if cabinet members have been told to wear masks, the spokesman said: "The cabinet would be expected to follow the same advice as any other member of the public."
But some visiting the Westminster branch on Wednesday disagreed with the government's move. Amy, a 38-year-old sales worker, went in at lunchtime without a mask. "I think it shouldn't be compulsory. People should make up their own minds," she said. "I thought they [the government ] were going in the other direction by allowing people to use common sense. I wear one on the tube and in confined spaces."
Len Smith, 54, a black-cab driver grabbing a sandwich, argued masks in shops should be optional but will comply when the rules are enforced. "Some people feel really affected by wearing one, which I do. It sends me into a panic. I can't breathe properly. No one should have the right to tell anyone they should wear a face mask," he said, having visited Pret without wearing one.
Labour has pointed the finger at the government, saying its plans for face masks have been confusing, with Gove saying on Sunday he did not favour them becoming mandatory in shops. Government sources later said he had misspoken.
Back at Pret on Wednesday, it appeared the apparent confusion was filtering through to the public. Yvonne, 59, who did not wear a mask during her visit because she felt it was quiet, but had it with her and will use it in shops when the rules take effect, said of the pictures of Gove and Truss: "They don't have a concrete idea of what they're asking people to do really, do they? I think that's where the confusion is."