Blackburn with Darwen council takes action to avoid local lockdown
Lancashire council recommends masks in all public spaces and places new limits on household visits
A Lancashire council has brought in fresh rules to restrict the spread of coronavirus in what officials described as an urgent effort to avoid a centrally imposed lockdown.
Blackburn with Darwen council recommended that only two members of one household visit another household and said residents should wear a face covering in all public spaces.
The government currently advises that two households can mix with no limit on numbers. Face coverings will only become mandatory in shops next Friday, and are currently mandatory on public transport in England.
The council's director of public health, Dominic Harrison, appealed to locals to urgently follow the advice. "If we don't, a local lockdown, like in Leicester, becomes a very real possibility," he said.
Health officials said 85% of the 114 confirmed coronavirus cases in Blackburn with Darwen in the two weeks to 11 July were from south Asian heritage communities. But it also showed that younger people were over-represented in the latest infections – with 20% of the 114 cases people aged 19 and under.
Harrison said younger south Asian residents may be asymptomatically infected – meaning they do not show any coronavirus symptoms – and then carry the disease into large multi-generational families.
Blackburn with Darwen has also asked residents to avoid any contact, including shaking hands, with people outside their household. The council is set to give support to more small shops to increase ventilation and social distancing as well as boost targeted testing, encouraging even those with no symptoms to get tested for Covid-19.
It is currently the fourth worst-affected local authority, with Covid-19 cases higher than the national average at around 40 per 100,000.
The borough also has a higher positivity rate, which is currently 7% – the rate of confirmed cases per 100,000 as a percentage of all who take a test – where the national average is 2-5%.
"We know that people have been worried by the release of figures that show an increase in coronavirus cases in Blackburn with Darwen, and don't want a second lockdown to be introduced," Harrison said.
"The council does not want the borough to be in that position either, which is why we are introducing these new measures to give everyone simple steps they can follow to do their bit to help keep the spread of the virus under control."
Harrison said the council now expected to see a rise in the number of cases due to increased testing in communities most at risk and warned that could push the area further towards a local lockdown.
"In the next week to 10 days, we will see a rise in the number of cases in the borough due to the increased targeted testing we are doing in communities most at risk, and because we have opened a Pillar 2 testing site next to the hospital last week," he said.
"In another two weeks, if the rates are continuing to rise, we will have to consider reversing some of the national lockdown lifting measures locally one by one until we see a reversal in the current rising trend. It's up to everyone to make sure we don't have to do that."
The council's leader, Mohammed Khan, said the message needed to get out that "life cannot go back to normal just yet, and we must all make sacrifices to avoid a local lockdown".
The health secretary, Matt Hancock, has said a decision will be made on Thursday on whether to lift local lockdown restrictions in Leicester. "We will look at 14 days of data – it is today 14 days since the measures were introduced – and we will look at that on Thursday and make a public announcement as soon as is reasonably possible.
"Thankfully the numbers have been coming down in Leicester, we have put in that extra testing, but the number of positive cases in Leicester is still well above the rest of the country," he said.