England's free school meals scheme to close for new claims over summer
Families who become eligible for vouchers during holidays will not be able to benefit
Children in England who become eligible for free school meals (FSM) after the summer holidays have begun will miss out on the government's voucher scheme, it has been confirmed.
Campaigners had recently welcomed the government's decision to extend the national free school meal voucher scheme over the summer holidays, following an intervention by the Manchester United and England footballer Marcus Rashford. However, they learned this week that any children who become eligible for FSM during the course of the holidays, for example, as a result of their parents losing work because of the pandemic, will not be able to use the scheme.
Responding to a written question on the issue from Labour, the children's minister Vicky Ford said school offices would be closed during the summer holidays. "If families are facing hardship, they can access the local authority emergency assistance grant … If families need urgent help, they can contact their local council to find out what services are available in their area," she said.
Sharon Hodgson, the MP for Washington and Sunderland West and chair of the all-party parliamentary group on school food, who tabled the question, accused the government of lacking compassion and understanding of the issues.
"I welcome the extension of the national school meal voucher over the summer holidays," she said, "but it is unacceptable that children who may become eligible during the holidays – due to the job retention scheme coming to an end and suspected redundancies, for example – will miss out on this scheme."
She said access to the local emergency assistance grant would result in a "postcode lottery" of food provision and support for children across England. "The government have once again shown a lack of compassion and understanding when it comes to children's food."
The voucher scheme has come in for criticism since it was launched earlier this year following the emergency closure of schools to all but children of key workers and vulnerable pupils. Some parents and school leaders have experienced difficulties accessing the £15 a week vouchers, while others have complained about a helpline that costs £21 an hour.
Campaigners remain concerned about holiday hunger among struggling families.
Emma Lewell-Buck, the Labour MP for South Shields, called on the government to act, writing on Twitter: "Children who become eligible for FSM during the holidays won't be able to apply for vouchers. 3.2m UC [universal credit] declarations since lockdown unemployment on the rise &amp; increase in child malnutrition hospital admissions, the Govt need to rethink this NOW."
This article was amended on 21 August 2020. A reference to 2,500 children in England being admitted to hospital with malnutrition in the first six months of this year was removed because problems were identified with the underlying data on which previous reporting of this statistic had been based.