British woman with newborn in Grenada turns to crowd funding for fare back to UK
New mother among thousands of travelling Britons waylaid by Covid-19 measures globally
A British woman who went to a Caribbean island for a short trip in March when she was six months' pregnant is stranded there with her new baby four months after the start of the country's lockdown.
Jaydee Haines-Narayan, 32, went to Grenada on 11 March with her mother, Karen McQueen, and her mother's partner.
Haines-Narayan has family links to Grenada. The country went into lockdown just days after she arrived. She realised she was not going to be able to get home to Britain for the birth of her baby. Her daughter Sheviah was born on 13 May, slightly premature and weighing five pounds.
The new mother has been told that the first flight available, back to the UK, is with British Airways at the beginning of September, with seats costing £1,250 each.
McQueen has been sending her daughter money to support her in Grenada and has now set up a crowd funder, and she and her 20 grandchildren are taking part in sponsored events in London to raise funds for her daughter's return air fare.
Haines-Narayan and her baby are among thousands of British people stranded abroad due to Covid-19 restrictions around the world.
The Foreign &amp; Commonwealth Office said it was continuing to provide support to British people stranded abroad; it had brought back 38,000 people from 57 countries or territories on 186 special charter flights.
Virgin Atlantic said it still had 4,000 passengers stranded in a variety of locations around the world. Some are British citizens, at present in the Caribbean, US, Hong Kong, Shanghai, and India, and some are foreign nationals stranded in the UK.
Haines-Narayan suffered from hyperemesis gravidarum, the same type of pregnancy sickness experienced by the Duchess of Cambridge, and was wrongly suspected of having Covid 19 by some police and medical staff on the island because of vomiting. Repeated coronavirus tests were negative, however.
Her partner and father of her baby is Grenadian and the plan was for him to return to the UK for the baby's birth which was booked in at Queen Charlotte's &amp; Chelsea maternity hospital, London.
"I didn't plan to give birth in Grenada," said Haines-Narayan. "I had planned to have a water birth at Queen Charlotte hospital with my partner with me. Instead I had the baby here. Everything has been so scary and confusing. I had nothing here for the baby. My sister in the UK managed to send out a barrel of baby clothes to me."
Haines-Narayan's mother and her partner got seats on a repatriation flight back to the UK on 2 June but the baby was too small to travel and had no travel documents at that point.
An FCO spokesperson said: "The vast majority of British travellers seeking to return to the UK have now done so, or have commercial options to return home. Our staff around the world continue to support anyone who needs assistance."