'I haven't had a drink since I started': how theatre got me off the streets
Theatre Royal Plymouth is one of many UK arts venues facing crisis. Clive, who sells the Big Issue outside the theatre, explains how it changed his life
After 23 years on the streets I managed to get into a hostel in Plymouth and was determined to stop drinking. I went past the Theatre Royal one day and I thought, I'd love to have a go at that – it could be the pitch for me. I went into the Big Issue office and they said, funnily enough we've just been given these free tickets for the theatre, would you like to go? I wasn't sure but I took a ticket and went along. The show was called In My Dreams I Dream I'm Dreaming, directed by Lee Hart.
It was quite awesome going in there at first. When you've been on the streets, going into places like that isn't what you're used to. But I went in and mooched around, and found out where I needed to go in the Drum theatre.
I told the usher I didn't know how I would cope with the play because I had mental health issues. So I said, I'm ever so sorry but if I need to leave I'm going to run. She said, that's okay. I watched the play and within minutes I was thinking, oh this is quite good, I'm not thinking about my problems any more – this is stronger than what I'm feeling.
The moment it was over I was told I could talk to the performers if I wanted, but I left as I thought that wasn't for me at the time. But I left feeling good, the show gave me something to think about that was bigger than me. That was a Friday night. The next day I bought the Evening Herald and there in the middle was a big spread with all the actors from the play. Full pages all about the show and how they'd come from different places. Some from rehab, other people had mental health problems, some people were long-term carers and just wanted a break from it. People from all different walks of life were in that play.
I told the Big Issue how much I loved it and by luck I was given the Theatre Royal pitch. From that day on I've been a vendor outside that theatre. I haven't had a drink since I started. It's helped a lot with my mental health. I stand outside and I say good evening. The first time you get that smile it just cheers you up. Whatever mood I turn up in, it puts a smile on my face when I'm there, too. I talk to them about the show they are seeing, in the Drum, the Lyric or the Lab – there can be three shows of an evening.
I like the realness of theatre – it's real people, it's not a screen, a TV, a cinema. It's real people doing real things that real people do. You never know how people are going to react, even if you see the same show every day, every night is different. It's so lovely for me to say hello to so many people. If it's an evening show, I'm saying hello to maybe 1,300, on a matinee day double that. And that's an awesome amount of people to see and really get to know – I've made so many friends.
I will definitely keep theatre in my life, 100%. I'm involved with Our Space (who did In My Dreams I Dream I'm Dreaming) and I was in the show Citizen in the Drum last year. I couldn't believe the lines I had, so many – that was a rollercoaster ride. I didn't think I could learn them but I did it, I kept it in my brain. I never thought I'd do anything like that – I left school when I was 13. It was a massive morale boost and I realised I didn't have to be this street person I had expected I'd be for the rest of my life. I've come away from that – I've managed to escape it.
Part of Laura Horton's Theatre Stories campaign.