Nicola Sturgeon warns Scots against Covid-19 complacency
First minister of Scotland urges caution as data shows daily cases of virus in single figures
Nicola Sturgeon has warned against complacency after the number of daily coronavirus cases in Scotland dropped back to single figures.
Data released by the Scottish government on Saturday shows that 18,340 people have tested positive for coronavirus, an increase of seven in the past 24 hours. Of those who have tested positive, 323 people were in hospital on Friday night.
No Covid-19 deaths were reported over that period, meaning the total number of fatalities remains at 2,490. This is the third day in a row without any new deaths.
The first minister tweeted: "Positive cases in past 24 hrs back in single figures (7) after yesterday's increase. Also, another day with no registered deaths amongst people who had tested positive.
"Progress still good – but with significant easing of lockdown next week, we all must take care #StaySafe."
At her daily briefing on Friday, Sturgeon announced that 18 people had tested positive for Covid-19 over the previous day – the highest number of new cases for three weeks. She said the rise was being "looked at very closely" and served as a reminder the virus has not gone away.
A total of six patients are in intensive care with confirmed or suspected Covid-19, a fall of six on the previous day.
Greater Glasgow and Clyde health board area has recorded the most cases positive (4,872) so far, followed by Lothian (3,165) and Lanarkshire (2,734).
Pubs, restaurants and hairdressers in Scotland will be allowed to reopen from next Wednesday, with exemptions to the 2-metre rule, although face coverings in shops became mandatory on Friday. Sturgeon has stressed that the general rule for distancing remained 2 metres.
From next Monday, non-essential shops within Scottish shopping centres can reopen, dentists can resume some routine treatments and outdoor contact sports can restart for under-18s. On Wednesday, museums, galleries, libraries and other visitor attractions can reopen with physical distancing and advance ticketing.
From 22 July, beauticians and nail salons will be able to reopen with enhanced hygiene measures in place, while Scottish universities and colleges can begin their phased return to on-campus learning as part of a blended model with remote teaching.
Sturgeon said the resumption of outdoor live events, reopening of indoor entertainment venues such as theatres and music venues, as well as the opening of indoor gyms, would not be before 31 July, although this would be kept under review.