London councils call on government to suspend NRPF immigration status
Charities warn of rise in homeless migrant workers during coronavirus pandemic
London councils have called on the government to suspend the controversial "no recourse to public funds" (NRPF) immigration status during the coronavirus pandemic to prevent a rise in homelessness.
Hundreds of thousands of immigrants in the UK have an immigration status that allows them to work in the country, but prevents them from accessing most benefits should they become unemployed.
Homelessness charities have warned of the rise in homeless migrant workers with the NRPF status – many of whom were working until lockdown in the hospitality industry, and have struggled to pay rents since losing their jobs.
In a letter to Priti Patel, the home secretary, local authorities and charities said legal limits on the benefits, housing and related support that public bodies can provide to people who have an immigration status with no recourse to public funds "make it almost impossible to secure long-term homes for many rough sleepers".
The letter said: "We welcome the government's partial suspension of these restrictions for work-ready European Economic Area rough sleepers, which has allowed local authorities to offer them up to three months' basic emergency accommodation and support … However, these limited changes do not provide a full or long-term answer. Key restrictions are still being enforced, including those that prevent access to universal credit and housing benefit. As it stands all restrictions are due to come back into force in the near future, creating a cliff edge beyond which councils will once again be prevented from providing many rough sleepers with the housing and other support they need."
Councils have been given special dispensation to house homeless migrants with NRPF status during the pandemic, but there is no longer-term provision to fund measures to stop people returning to the streets once lockdown ends and hotels housing homeless people return to being used by tourists.
The letter, spearheaded by Southwark councillor Kieron Williams, said: "Without urgent action to address these issues we risk facing the unthinkable tragedy of rough sleeping going back up even while the threat of Covid-19 remains.
"Conversely, granting all people who have been accommodated by local authorities to prevent them having to sleep rough during this pandemic access to universal credit and housing benefit would have negligible impact on the national benefit bill, as the number of people affected would be a fraction of a percent of the claimant count, but would make it possible to help them off the street for good."
A government spokesperson said: "We have been very clear that nobody should find themselves destitute during this crisis due to circumstances beyond their control."Families with leave under family and human rights routes can apply, free of charge, to have no recourse to public funds conditions lifted and we encourage anyone eligible to submit an application. We have also taken extensive action to support those with these conditions, such as rent protections and allocating £750m for charities to support the most vulnerable."