Underfunded, unappreciated care homes were given little chance against Covid-19
Around the world, too many governments are refusing responsibility for long-term care
Covid-19 has had an enormous impact on people who use and provide long-term care in many parts of the world. The scale and depth of this impact is only just beginning to be understood. Even counting how many care home residents have died is enormously challenging, as few countries have good publicly available data. And there is little evidence on other impacts on mental and physical health of both the disease and the measures adopted to prevent infections.
How many people who live in care homes have died? In some countries none at all; in others, thousands. Where Covid-19 has spread widely in the community, larger proportions of those living in care homes have died. In the UK our current estimate is that about one in 20 care home residents have died, but this could be an underestimate, especially if excess mortality is accounted for.
Some aspects of the pandemic would have challenged even a very well functioning care system.
First, it's a new disease that is very different to the flu and other infections most countries have experienced and prepared for. Second, given that large proportions of people living in care homes are older, frail and have significant health problems, these populations are much more likely to die if they are infected. Third, communal living and the need for close proximity of personal care makes physical distancing very difficult in care homes.
Finally, the measures to protect those in care homes have detrimental impacts too, particularly among those with dementia or other conditions that result in difficulties understanding or remembering why routines have been altered and why social contact has been interrupted.
In addition to these factors, there are long-standing problems with most care systems. Underfunding and low political appreciation are at the heart of the problems of why it has been so difficult for care homes to respond effectively to a pandemic.
Underfunding means there is inadequate infrastructure in terms of the old buildings often used as care homes, and underpaid staff who may experience poor working and living conditions.
Poor information systems have hampered the planning for the pandemic and the responses to it. In many countries, guidelines for infection prevention and control took a long time to be updated once credible evidence on asymptomatic transmission (and so-called atypical symptoms such as delirium) in care homes had been published in academic journals.
More generally, the complex governance of long-term care appears to have been a major barrier to coordinated and decisive action, even once the scale of the problem had been understood. In many countries, no one at government level seems to have responsibility for long-term care.
The lesson so far from the pandemic is that the best way to protect people living in care homes is by containing Covid-19 both inside and outside care homes, with strong contract tracing and testing capabilities and good local information systems to identify and contain clusters. It can prevent both the spread of the infection itself and the detrimental mental and physical health impacts of isolation and confinement.
Now that infection rates are much lower in many countries, local level data about infection rates must be used to ensure that if a local outbreak is detected, care homes in the area have rapid access to regular testing and personal protection equipment (PPE) stocks are in place, as well as contingency plans for additional staff capacity and, if needed, isolation facilities.
This pandemic has shown that countries that experienced Sars and Mers, such as Hong Kong and South Korea, have done better at preventing and controlling Covid-19 in care homes with frequent staff training and good stocks of PPE.
In Europe, Denmark is a good example of a care system with strong public and political support, highly qualified staff and good local coordination between public health, the healthcare system and social care. Its modern care home model is based on the idea of apartments with some communal areas, and this seems to have helped contain the impact of Covid-19 among residents.
Having rehabilitation hospitals helped Austria, Germany and some regions of Spain , as they were easily converted into quarantine facilities where people could be discharged to from hospital, reducing pressure on care homes to admit people who potentially had the virus. They also provided isolation facilities for care homes that did not have enough capacity.
The pandemic also throws into stark relief how care homes, especially those in older buildings, were never designed with infection control in mind and do not make good isolation facilities. It is also questionable whether many even offer good living facilities. It is important to be realistic about the capabilities for care homes to act as quarantine facilities; the evidence suggests this has been vastly overestimated, with tragic consequences particularly in the UK.
Adelina Comas-Herrera is curator of LTCcovid.org and works at the London School of Economics' care policy and evaluation centre