UK charities face soaring demand for grief counselling due to Covid-19
Bereaved families say they have been abandoned by the government
Bereavement charities in the UK predict demand for their services could double in 2020 because of the pandemic, as struggling families of Covid-19 victims call on the government for more funding for grief counselling.
Cruse Bereavement Care, the largest bereavement charity in the UK, which helped 50,000 people in 2019, is anticipating an extra 20,000 to 50,000 clients this year, and is hoping to train more than 1,000 new volunteers to meet the demand.
"We're hugely experienced in dealing with other types of emergencies," said its chief executive, Steven Wibberley. "Cruse has provided support at a number of major incidents including the Grenfell fire, the London Bridge stabbings, and the Manchester Arena bombing. Wind the clock back, we had a team that flew out to New York to support in the aftermath of 9/11.
"But nothing at this scale, not the 60,000 excess deaths. This is unprecedented."
The charity offers one-to-one support at about 75 local branches around the country, a national helpline and an online webchat service, all staffed by a team of almost 5,000 volunteers – many of whom have backgrounds in counselling or therapy, although this isn't a requirement.
The number of calls to the helpline is higher than before lockdown, and they are lasting up to seven minutes longer on average as people struggle to deal with the shock and trauma of coronavirus deaths.
Maureen Craig lost Geoffrey, her husband of 42 years, in April after he contracted the virus, and Cruse has been a lifeline for her daughter.
"She has found them very helpful. I don't think she would be in the place she's in now if it wasn't for the Cruse counselling she's had. She was in a very, very bad way when she started it," said Maureen.
However, Maureen herself said face-to-face therapy sessions – currently unavailable to her because of lockdown – are the only thing that will help her through her grief, after experiencing panic attacks and PTSD.
"When I get into bed at night, all I can hear is those phone calls, having to FaceTime my children to tell them their father was dying. Seeing him take his last breath, these things are burned on my eyelids, and I need therapy to get me through that," she said.
Other charities are also feeling the strain. The national healthcare charity Sue Ryder has reported an 84% increase in demand for its online bereavement support, and its free video bereavement counselling service has a growing waiting list.
Other services are springing up to try to meet the demand. The National Bereavement Partnership, which ran for eight years until 2010, re-formed in April to add more capacity. "Services were already stretched, so we decided to come back to life again," said its CEO, Michaela Willis. The charity offers a helpline and has applied for government funding to so it can expand into one-to-one support.
Growing waiting lists are leaving some with no option but to pay for help. Kathryn de Prudhoe is a therapist in Leeds who lost her father, Tony Clay, aged 60, to Covid-19 in April. She contacted Cruse but, faced with a four- to six-week waiting list for one-to-one sessions, decided to pay for a private therapist instead.
"I feel dramatically different now than I did three or four weeks ago. Some of the things that I was holding inside me, I've been able to say out loud, and that's huge," said De Prudhoe, a member of the Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group which is calling on the government for more support.
"But there's going to be thousands of people who just can't afford to pay for private therapy and the free services that are around don't have the resources to meet the need," she said. "The government need to put up some funding for counselling support not just for bereaved families but for all people who've been impacted by the virus, whether it's NHS workers or people who've been ill themselves."
The experience of dealing with grief during lockdown could also have significant repercussions, charities fear. "People have gone through this horrendous bereavement without being able to see their loved ones and without any support," said Wibberley. "Over the next months and years, bereavement charities will be more important than ever."
This was echoed by Maureen Craig, who had to self-isolate alone at home for two weeks after her husband died. "All those support systems that I would normally have, who would sit and talk to me and hug me and comfort me when I have a panic attack, they're not available to me," she said.
Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice feel they've been abandoned by the government, and say the mental health effects of the pandemic could become a timebomb if left unaddressed.
"There has been no recognition of the emotional, psychological and potentially financial impact to the families that have been affected by this," said De Prudhoe. "And there's still 1,000 people a week dying. It's not going away."
Cruse Bereavement Care can be contacted on 0808 808 1677, and the National Bereavement Partnership on 0800 448 0800.