Leicester residents could be fined up to £3,200 for breaching new lockdown laws
As pubs reopen in the rest of England, all non-essential businesses in the east Midlands city must close their doors again
The government has published its local lockdown rules for Leicester, which will see most businesses shutting their doors once again.
The new regulations, published on Friday afternoon, come into force on Saturday, when pubs, restaurants and hairdressers can open in the rest of England. Anyone who breaks the rules in Leicester could be fined £100, which will double every time they flout the law, and could reach up to £3,200 for the sixth and subsequent offences.
The city was placed under harsher restrictions by the health secretary, Matt Hancock, following a surge in coronavirus cases. As well as the city of Leicester, the affected area includes parts of Leicestershire that touch on the city's boundaries, including parts of Blaby and Charnwood.
The rules state that restaurants, cafes, bars and pubs must remain closed, but can stay open for takeaways. Exceptions to the rules are made for cafes and canteens at hospitals, care homes, prisons and military bases, which can all remain open.
Other non-essential businesses, such as cinemas, theatres, nightclubs, museums, gyms, nail salons and hairdressers, must remain closed, unless they are hosting blood donations. Sports venues such as indoor fitness studios, gyms, sports courts and indoor or outdoor swimming pools can be used for elite athletes to train.
Businesses that can stay open include supermarkets, off-licences, pharmacies, banks, homeware stores, post offices and garden centres. The list also extends to outdoor markets and outdoor sports courts.
Hotels and bed and breakfasts must remain closed unless guests are unable to return to their homes, they are a critical worker, or they need accommodation while moving house or to attend a funeral.
Places of worship must also close except for funerals, voluntary services such as food banks, and private prayer by individuals. People can meet outdoors in groups of no more than six as long as they adhere to social distancing rules.
People are also banned from staying overnight at another household and are not allowed to visit others in their gardens or indoors.
The rules are to be reviewed every two weeks, with the first review due on July 18.