English councils warn £500m Covid-19 cash injection will not stop cuts
Government breaking promise to 'do whatever it takes' to meet coronavirus cost, local authorities say
Councils in England say they face a financial shortfall this year of more than £1bn and will be forced to make further cuts to local services after warning that a Covid-19 rescue package unveiled by ministers did not go far enough.
The package, presented on Thursday as a "comprehensive and flexible" offer, proposed a £500m coronavirus cash injection for England alongside a proposed scheme to defer lost council tax and business-rate takings, and partly compensate councils for reduced income from car parking, museums and leisure centres.
However, councils said the package, while welcome, still left them with a £1.2bn gap in funding this year, fuelling frustration that the government had broken promises made at the start of lockdown to "do whatever it takes" to ensure local authorities were able to meet the cost of Covid-19.
In addition to the £500m for English councils, under the proposed package £50m will go to the Scottish government, £30m to the Welsh government and £15m to the Northern Ireland executive. .
The Local Government Association (LGA), which mainly represents English and Welsh local authorities, said that while the rescue package recognised the pressure councils and local services were under, it needed to do much more to meet their "severe financial challenges".
"We reiterate our call to government to meet all extra cost pressures and income losses from fees and charges and other sources, including commercial activity, in full if councils are to avoid having to make tough decisions on in-year cuts to services to meet their legal duty to set a balanced budget this year," said the Conservative leader of the LGA, James Jamieson.
Rob Whiteman, head of Cipfa, the local government accountants' body, said councils faced their toughest-ever round of budget planning for next year. "Residents up and down the country are likely to experience service reductions as councils meet their statutory duty to balance budgets."
Sir Stephen Houghton, chair of the Sigoma group of urban councils in England, said: "The £500m provided will only potentially cover our members until the end of this month, meaning many will still face substantial in-year deficits. The risk of significant cuts and section 114 notices [declarations of insolvency] has not gone away."
David Williams, chair of the County Councils Network, a lobby for 37 mainly Tory-controlled authorities in England, said: "With costs continuing to rise and no guarantees over compensation for lost council tax and business rates, many of our member councils still face financial uncertainty this year and next."
Thursday's announcement followed warnings from local authorities in England that they faced a Covid-19 net costs shortfall of £7.4bn this year, despite £3.2bn in two bailout funding rounds in March and April. Some councils have already taken emergency action to reduce spending or face insolvency.
Initial calculations by Cipfa estimate that the government's Covid-19 funding package covers around £2.5bn of that £7.4bn shortfall, with a further £3.7bn in lost council tax and business rates potentially restored in the autumn public spending review. That would still leave £1.2bn for councils to find.
Robert Jenrick, the local government secretary, speaking by Zoom to council leaders at the online LGA annual conference, described the package as a "sophisticated" plan that would reassure councils. "That's what matters now, to give you confidence, stability and security to move forward for the rest of the year."
The £500m cash injection, which will be shared among 343 councils in England, comes alongside an income loss compensation scheme that will refund councils at the rate of 75p in the pound where they have lost more than 5% of their expected income this year from rents, and fees and charges from car parking, museums and leisure centres.
However, the scheme will not cover financial losses incurred in council-owned commercial businesses – Luton and Manchester councils own their local airports, which have been hit hard by Covid-19 – or losses in council investments in commercial property, intended to part-fund local services.
In addition, the government said accounting rules would be changed to ease councils' cashflow pressures by allowing them to spread the impact of losses from the non-payment of council tax and business rates over three years, rather than the usual one.
Jonathan Carr-West, chief executive of the Local Government Information Unit thinktank said the extra cash was welcome but unlikely to be enough. "The real problem here is that we are plugging gaps rather than getting ahead of the situation. And we still have no settled, sustainable, long-term plan for funding local government."
Adam Lent, director of the New Local Government Network thinktank, said: "The bottom line is that this [extra funding] is a help but does not guarantee that there will not be cuts to vital public services. It will also leave councils very wary or unable to step up if there is a second wave [of coronavirus]."