Norwich theatre blasts 'idle' government as redundancy threatens half of workforce
Theatre's chief executive says government is standing by as vital industry is allowed to 'fade into the dust'
More than half of the workforce at Norwich theatre are at risk of redundancy as the severe financial impact of the coronavirus deepens across UK arts venues.
On Wednesday, Norwich theatre – whose venues are the Theatre Royal, Playhouse and Stage Two – announced a major restructuring that puts the roles of 113 employees – 53% of the workforce – at risk of redundancy. A further 59 employees engaged on zero-hours contracts have been told they will no longer receive any work.
Stephen Crocker, the theatre's chief executive, said he was "shocked and angry" that the government was "standing idle as an industry that has delivered so much to this country and is so vital to its recovery is being allowed to fade into dust". Describing his staff as the lifeblood of the organisation, he said: "My team and I have done all we can to support and protect them over these past few months and will continue to do so as we explore all options through this consultation process."
Michael Newey, chair of the trustees of Norwich theatre, said that 95% of the organisation's income had been lost in the shutdown and that the continuing financial shortfall was "no longer sustainable".
It is anticipated that it will be at least six months before full-scale operations can recommence at the Theatre Royal, which provides the bulk of box-office income.
Last month, the theatre announced that its pantomime, Dick Whittington and His Cat, would be postponed until 2021 because of "an extended period of closure", as well as lack of a government support package.
Redundancy processes have also commenced at Theatre Royal Plymouth, Birmingham Hippodrome and Horsecross Arts, the creative organisation and charity behind Perth Concert Hall and Perth theatre. In May, Nuffield Southampton Theatres went into administration as a result of the lack of ticket sales during the pandemic and uncertainty about a reopening date.
Last week, the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, unveiled a "roadmap" with a "clear pathway" for the reopening of the UK's performing arts venues. However, it was dismissed as vague and meaningless by leading industry figures.
A government spokesperson stated: "We are doing all we can to support these industries through government grants, loans, the furlough scheme and the Arts Council's £160m emergency response package. We are also considering ways in which we may be able to support it further on top of the unprecedented financial assistance we have already provided."