Victoria takes control of three more aged care homes as 278 new Covid cases recorded
Premier Daniel Andrews reports eight more deaths and the lowest number of new coronavirus cases for more than two weeks
Victoria's aged care crisis continues, with the department of health taking control of three more aged care homes due to Covid-19 outbreaks, as the state's premier raises the hardship payments available to those who must forgo income in order to isolate after testing.
Victoria recorded 278 new cases of Covid-19 on Thursday, the lowest number for more than two weeks, with the number of total actives cases also dipping.
But eight additional deaths were also recorded, bringing the state's toll to 275. The latest deaths included a woman in her 50s, two men in their 70s, two women and two men in their 80s, and one man in his 90s.
The state government has stepped in and taken control of Glenlyn Aged Care, Florence Aged Care and Kalyna Aged Care, all in the western suburbs of Melbourne. The three facilities will now be controlled by public hospitals in Melbourne.
"Those public hospitals will work with nurses and personal care attendants from private partners, whether it be Ramsay, Epworth or St Vincent's Private," the premier, Daniel Andrews, said.
"We've essentially assumed responsibility, taken over those facilities for the purposes of the highest-quality care and to deal with challenging circumstances."
Glenlyn nursing home in Glenroy has only been referenced once in department press releases, with the department on Sunday announcing it was investigating 11 cases linked to the facility. Florence Aged Care in St Albans was reported to have at least one case a fortnight ago, and on 29 July a department release stated there was a single case of Covid-19 among staff at the Kalyna home in Delahey.
Andrews on Thursday again rejected the idea of imposing a blanket transfer of all Covid-positive aged care residents to hospital, a topic that has been a key point of discussion at the ongoing royal commission into aged care.
Andrews said transfers would continue on a case-by-case basis.
"We have had some private aged care providers … who would rather like their entire resident group to be taken out of their home in one go," the premier said.
"We did have, early on in this aged care crisis, a particular provider who rang and ordered 100 ambulances as if that was something that would be in any way feasible.
"We don't have a system that is designed to deliver the easiest outcome for the private operator. We have a system that is designed to provide the best care for the resident."
Andrews announced an increase to the $300 payments available for those who have to isolate while awaiting Covid-19 test results and do not have access to sick leave.
Such workers are now eligible for a $450 payment, which the premier suggested was a "better reckoning for the loss of income".
Andrews said the increased payment was not a reflection of the longer wait time for test results. The turnaround time for results has grown from an average of 1.6 days to two, according to the premier.
Although Victoria reported less than 300 cases on Thursday, the first time since 29 July, both the premier and the deputy chief health officer, Prof Allen Cheng, said it was too soon to assume the state had reached the peak of infections.
"These stage four restrictions, as challenging, as heartbreaking, as painful as they are, are working," Andrews said.
"We are not getting in any way ahead of ourselves and we would caution against any Victorian thinking we aren't in the midst of a real marathon. This is an endurance race and we need to stay the course on this."
Victoria's three largest rural cities – Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo – also saw increased case numbers, prompting the health department to establish a number of additional testing sites in those areas and urge any symptomatic residents to be tested.
At Thursday's press conference, Andrews was questioned once again on the matter of hotel quarantine, and whether Australian Defence Force assistance was offered in the early days of the program.
The state's transport infrastructure minister, Jacinta Allan, was also asked about the hotels during the third day of hearings at the inquiry into the Victorian government's response to the pandemic.
The Public Accounts and Estimates Committee heard a representative from the transport department was present at a 27 March meeting when it is understood the decision to use private security for hotel quarantine was made.
Allan said she was informed of the program shortly after the meeting and her department was tasked with organising the transport of returned international travellers from the airport to the hotels via the private company SkyBus.
Allan would not answer questions from the Nationals MP Danny O'Brien regarding which minister had ultimate oversight of the program.
"You and your colleagues have canvassed this on multiple occasions during the course of this week. You will know that I have nothing to add to the comments that have been made already," Allan said.
O'Brien replied that it was a "pretty simple question" yet "no minister wants to say who it was".
The committee was separately told by the transport department's head of transport services, Nick Foa, that the tests required to receive a learner permit could be moved online to help work through the backlog of applications.
The tests currently must be done at VicRoads centres, which are closed due to the pandemic. They are completed on computers but have never been available online. But, Foa said, due to Victoria's lockdown it was impossible to provide a timeline of when the shift might occur.