Court delays bid to move man from immigration detention in Melbourne to WA
The federal government wants to transfer the 68-year-old – who has diabetes – amid concerns he is at risk of contracting Covid-19
A man remains in limbo in Melbourne immigration detention amid a legal stoush about moving him to Western Australia because of Covid-19.
The federal court previously ruled the 68-year-old – who has diabetes – could no longer be held at the Melbourne Immigration Transit Accommodation centre at Broadmeadows because he was at risk of contracting coronavirus.
The federal government decided to move him on Thursday to Western Australia's Yongah Hill immigration detention centre.
But Justice Bernard Murphy subsequently ordered the man remain at the Melbourne centre after his lawyers launched a last-ditch bid to block the transfer over fears he could catch the virus on the plane.
"We're talking about a man's health here – I'm not going to play legal games with either of you," Murphy told lawyers for the detainee and the home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, during a last-minute hearing on Wednesday afternoon.
"I'd be loath to have an order I've made expose the applicant to risk."
The detainee, who has not been named, wants to be released so he can be with his family.
The Asylum Seeker Resource Centre said the 68-year-old had multiple health problems and had spent nearly a decade living with his son, an Australian citizen, and grandchildren.
"This (the WA transfer) is a cynical move by the department which should immediately release this man from closed detention into the community so he can return to his family without delay and practice preventative measures like all Victorians in lockdown," his principal lawyer, Dr Carolyn Graydon, said on Wednesday.
The man was detained over an adverse security assessment, which advocates said was based on allegations dating back nearly 15 years.
Lawyers for the federal government previously told the court he was at no greater risk of catching Covid-19 at the Broadmeadows detention centre than in the community.
Murphy said on Wednesday he thought the man would be safer in WA than Victoria. But the judge said he needed to be satisfied about the risk posed by travel and ordered the case return to court next week.