The 'dividendkeeper' shuffle: how jobkeeper payments are flowing to shareholders
Flaws are being exposed in the government's jobkeeper support package as shareholders reap millions in subsidised dividends
The use by companies of jobkeeper money to subsidise payouts to their shareholders exposes flaws in the design of the Morrison government's flagship coronavirus economic support package.
So far, there's evidence that shareholders have obtained somewhere in the low tens of millions of dollars off the back of taxpayers – a lot of money to an ordinary person but, in the scheme of the Australian economy, just a trickle.
The fear among market watchers, however, is that as more and more companies report their results over the coming weeks, that trickle will become a torrent and the amount of money at stake will soar.
Economically, the problem is that what we are seeing is a transfer of millions of dollars from taxpayers – the community at large – to shareholders, some of whom are already quite rich.
It's fixable, and there are a couple of different ways proposed to do it.
But first, we need to understand how the dividendkeeper shuffle works.
To get jobkeeper, the first version announced back in March, businesses had to show a reduction in turnover of at least 30% for the three months to the end of June (50% for really big businesses).
However, due to the crisis, they were allowed to estimate the fall.
The government paid companies $1,500 a fortnight for each eligible full-time worker, and the companies were required to pass the lot on to their workforce.
So where's the benefit for the company?
Well, by paying the wages of employees, the government was freeing up money elsewhere in the company.
And if things didn't turn out to be as dire as feared, or the June slump was compensated for by the rest of the year being good, the money that was freed up could – and was – used to pay dividends to shareholders.
So far, that's helped Adairs pay a whopping $11.3m to its shareholders (including more than $400,000 to managing director Mark Ronan) and Nick Scali pay out $3.9m, the lion's share of which – $2.5m – goes to the founding Scali family.
On Tuesday, dentist chain 1300 Smiles became the latest company to get on the dividendkeeper laughing gas, paying out $2.9m to shareholders after getting $1.8m in jobkeeper.
The chain's founder, Daryl Holmes, received about the same amount in his dividend cheque as the company did in jobkeeper support.
Not all of the dividends that were paid out were made possible at your and my expense, and there's no suggestion anyone involved with any of these companies has done anything wrong.
But market sources say that in its first few months the jobkeeper scheme was wide open for what you could call large-scale maximisation of shareholder returns or, if you were less kind, industrial-scale rorting.
Whether or not that's correct should be made clear as listed companies declare their winnings this month. With the total cost of the jobkeeper program now somewhere in excess of $90bn, there's plenty to go around.
Last month, when it extended the scheme to the end of March next year, at a reduced rate, the government made some changes that should reduce further leakage of cash from the public purse to the trouser pockets of executives.
It tightened eligibility by saying the downturn in business needed to be felt in each of two consecutive three-month periods and outlawed the use of projections to qualify.
However, that was before Melbourne's second wave lockdown. Last week, as Victoria's economy was plunged into an even deeper recession, Morrison was forced to loosen the rules again to prevent businesses that actually needed the payment from being thrown to the wolves.
It was of course inevitable that there would be problems with jobkeeper.
The program was put together quickly in the face of a pandemic that no one saw coming.
And it is also inevitable that tipping buckets of money into the economy in a crisis always seems to involve handing out cash to people who you either don't like or who don't deserve it.
But it also is probably worth remembering that jobkeeper was the Morrison government's third attempt, in as many weeks, to deal with an economic crisis that they clearly did not initially understand was as enormous as it was, even though it was caused by their own actions in shutting the country down to put the brakes on coronavirus transmission.
Even if we can't go back in time and fix the last few months, there are ideas around to stop dividends continuing to come out of the community's pocket, if Morrison and his treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, want them.
The Greens propose making any company that pays a dividend ineligible for jobkeeper, while Centre Alliance senator Rex Patrick proposes having them pay back their jobkeeper.
Of course, another option is to do nothing. After all, you could say the policy is working. Jobs have been saved, and the balance sheets of companies have recovered to the point where they are again paying dividends.
Nature is healing, even.
But with millions thrown into unemployment, Victoria – a quarter of the economy – crawling back into a dark hole and many more companies likely to fail across the country over coming months, it doesn't feel like that makes much political sense.