Daniel Andrews says he is 'accountable for any mistakes' in Victoria's Covid-19 hotel quarantine
The Victorian premier has been interrogated by the media as the state reported 471 new coronavirus cases and eight more deaths
The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said he was "accountable for any mistakes" made in the hotel quarantine program that sparked a second wave of Covid-19 in Victoria, as he was interrogated by the media on Thursday about what went wrong.
The state reported 471 more Covid-19 cases and eight additional deaths since Wednesday. Those who died ranged in age from their 60s to their 90s. The state is under either stage three or stage four restrictions depending on the region, with the latter involving a curfew and the widespread closure of businesses, leading to significant job losses.
On 3 July, the Victorian health minister, Jenny Mikakos, said early genomic sequencing had pointed to a super spreader of Covid-19 as a source for many of Victoria's infections, and Andrews said this sequencing had exposed an infection-control failure in the hotel quarantine program through late May and early June.
Andrews said hotel security staff breached infection control protocols and mingled with infected returned international travellers, becoming infected themselves and spreading the virus through the community. The premier has faced repeated questions since then about why security contractors were hired to monitor the travellers rather than police and Australian Defence Force personnel used in other jurisdictions, and about any infection control training the security staff received. Until Thursday Andrews avoided answering many questions about the breach, saying it would be inappropriate to do so while an independent judicial inquiry into the hotel program was under way.
However, on Wednesday the inquiry chair, Justice Jennifer Coate, said there was "no general restriction or prohibition which would prevent a person from commenting publicly or answering questions" also being tackled by the inquiry. It prompted a series of questions from journalists at Andrews' daily press update on Thursday.
He was asked when he first became aware of the issues with hotel quarantine. Andrews responded he first knew the virus in hotels had led to community outbreaks on 3 July, when he and the chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, "confirmed for you that both (a) we had that genomic sequencing report and that (b) we were setting up a judicial inquiry to get to the bottom of it". He said he had not tried to avoid responsibility.
"I am accountable because of the job I have," Andrews said.
"I'm accountable for any mistakes, and all mistakes, that are made. I have never shirked that responsibility. I've never moved so much as an inch away from that responsibility. That is the role that I have. I will own those errors. I will be accountable for those errors. Mistakes have been made. I'm determined to get those answers. And I think the best way to do that is to have an arm's-length process."
The hotel quarantine inquiry has been postponed to 17 August due to the extra work required to comply with stage four restrictions.
Meanwhile, there were now 810 active cases of the virus in health care workers. Among them were 346 nurses, many of whom work across hospitals and aged care. Asked for a list of the hospitals with active infections, Andrews responded: "We'll see what we can get back to you."
A coronial inquiry has been launched into five Covid-19 deaths linked to St Basil's aged care in Fawkner, with the facility recording more than 150 infections. All residents were moved out of the facility due to infection control concerns. Asked about reports that residents would be moved back into the home from hospital, and whether he was comfortable with that, Andrews said: "I'm not sure that I can comment specifically on a specific aged care but there is certainly a risk assessment that's done about when people need to go to hospital and when they can go back to what is their homes."