Labor condemns Craig Kelly's suggestion Daniel Andrews could 'face 25 years in jail' for hydroxychloroquine ban
Liberal MP admits he has 'no medical expertise' but backs drug despite studies showing it is an ineffective treatment for Covid-19
Labor has labelled comments by the federal Liberal MP Craig Kelly "offensive" and "irresponsible" after he questioned whether Daniel Andrews could be criminally liable for blocking the use of hydroxychloroquine to treat Covid-19.
The use of hydroxychloroquine has been championed by Donald Trump, but the most reputable global studies have found it is ineffective as a treatment, and it can have severe and even deadly side effects if used inappropriately.
Kelly's suggestion that the Victorian premier "and others" could be liable for industrial manslaughter appears to have no legal basis, is at odds with his own government's cautious approach and ignores months of evidence that the drug is not a wonder treatment for Covid-19.
In a late-night Sunday or early-morning Monday post, Kelly posed the question: "COULD THE VICTORIAN PREMIER (and others) FACE 25 YEARS IN JAIL FOR CONTINUING TO BAN HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE?"
The post was accompanied by a graphic with a Herald Sun article by Terry McCrann targeting Andrews for listing hydroxychloroquine as a controlled substance in April, and a mocked-up image of Andrews behind bars.
Kelly also posted that the ABC should be defunded over what he called "appalling" coverage highlighting the politicisation of the drug. Other posts suggested hydroxychloroquine was responsible for fighting Covid-19 in Kazakhstan, Morocco, the United Arab Emirates, Turkey, and India.
The shadow health minister, Chris Bowen, responded in a tweet labelling Kelly's posts "offensive and dangerous".
"Suffice it to say there is one body which determines drug safety and efficacy and it's the [Therapeutic Goods Administration]," he said. "Trumpian rants by Liberal MPs have no place in fighting this pandemic."
The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, told reporters in Sydney that Scott Morrison "needs to get his backbench in line" over comments he described as "irresponsible" and "outrageous".
"I was shocked by them, that any member of parliament would be so irresponsible at a time where Victorians are doing it tough."
Scott Morrison declined to comment on the controversy, telling reporters in Canberra he would not "get onto what people talk about on Facebook on a day like this".
The acting chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, said the drug was safe to prevent malaria but "in terms of its use for this particular disease the jury is pretty much out, it doesn't work".
In March the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia and the Australasian Society for Infectious Diseases called for immediate cessation of prescribing and dispensing of hydroxychloroquine to treat Covid outside clinical trials, citing the lack of evidence of clinical benefit and shortages for patients with rheumatological conditions.
On 5 Junethe chief investigators of a UK trial of 1,542 patients given hydroxychloroquine stated they had observed no beneficial effect of the drug including no difference in 28-day mortality, duration of admission or other outcomes.
The US Food and Drug Administration has revoked emergency authorisation for the drugs, citing ineffectiveness to treat coronavirus and reports of heart complications.
Kelly defended the comments, telling Guardian Australia: "I know what I'm saying is controversial – it's meant to be – but that's because people's lives are at risk."
Although he acknowledged he had "no medical expertise whatsoever" he claimed the weight of medical evidence was that "this drug can be effective if given in the early period of the disease". He dismissed contrary studies as "old evidence".
Kelly defended his decision to target Andrews, arguing: "There's a big difference between caution – the TGA don't ban it but they don't recommend it … and taking the decision out of doctors' and patients' hands.
"Victoria is obviously the frontline state – I believe every pressure should be put on them to allow the use of this drug."
On Monday the National party MP and former deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce also courted controversy by invoking the billionaire investor and bogeyman of the far right George Soros in a comment on interest rates.
Joyce told Channel Seven's Sunrise that Australia was borrowing from "overseas", warning that with net public debt on target to reach $1tn "at some stage you're going to pay it back".
When the presenter David Koch noted that interest rates were at a historical low of 0.8%, Joyce replied: "Yeah, of course interest rates will go up – of course interest rates will go up.
"Well, did anyone who planned that this will be the lowest interest rates five years ago in history in the history of mankind? Did anybody plan about this 10 years ago?
"I remember when Telecom bonds were at 17%, you know it too. And you have to look at your short-term money rates. You have to look at whether George Soros knows what he's doing it. He's planning on interest rates going up."
Soros is famous for making more than £1 billion by short-selling the British pound in 1992, and has become the target of antisemitic demonisation and far-right conspiracy theories in part because of his philanthropy for liberal and progressive causes.
Joyce told Guardian Australia he "could have referred to a number of people" trading in short-term money markets but had mentioned Soros because he had been the subject of a recent news article, which Joyce failed to identify.
"Interest rates are as low as they've ever been and that means the next movement is up. I don't know about racial views or racial issues regarding Soros but, like him or not, he's good at picking the market."
The prime minister's office has been contacted for comment.