Hope echoes through empty streets: tighter Covid restrictions bring relief to Melbourne locals
As Victoria's coronavirus cases continue to surge, the sense of structure provided by the new lockdown plan has comforted many
At 8.29am on a weekday at Flinders Street station in central Melbourne, the famous front steps would usually be swarming with workers, spilling out of the platforms and on to the streets. In months gone by it wasn't unusual for a thousand people to cross the road with each green signal.
On Monday morning, the intersection was lucky to have five at a time. Victoria's capital was still reeling from Sunday's announcement of stage four lockdowns. By the afternoon the worst fears of many had come to pass with the foreshadowing of new restrictions on businesses in the city.
For city locals like Kara, who asked for her last name to be omitted, the new restrictions were a relief. She is a ward clerk in Austin hospital's Covid-19 unit and was in the central business district running errands on her day off.
"I wasn't surprised [about the new lockdown], we have been totally inundated," she said.
"It's really hectic, there are a lot of people scared. There are families in there, it's heartbreaking ... There are kids, and they come in and they have to wear all this stuff on their face and they are really, really scared."
"It's exhausting, you work six days straight and you have to have all gear on … It's a whole new world – I never thought I'd live to see a world like this."
Kara said stage four has made her optimistic: "I am really hopeful. Hopefully, the number will go down over the next few weeks and we will see some relief."
This hope was echoed by many in the city. Although case numbers are still high, the sense of structure provided by the new six-week plan has been a comfort.
The phrase "we just have to do the right thing and hopefully we get through this" was repeated by almost everyone asked how they were feeling.
While the empty streets were jarring for those who have been tucked away in suburban homes since March, for ghost city veterans such as Emilee and Aidan, it was par for the course.
"We were just saying today seemed a little busier than usual, if anything," Emilee said.
Aidan added: "It's just a normal morning."
Most people still travelling to the city were on the clock, and were reluctant to give their last names, lest their bosses know they had been out in the streets any longer than necessary.
Five distinct groups were apparent. There were office workers hurrying to office buildings, food delivery drivers who kept their motorbike helmets on in lieu of a mask, construction crews, police officers, and packs of disinfecting workers in yellow high vis roaming the streets, wiping down door handles and benches. On some blocks they outnumbered pedestrians.
Two of these workers, Francesca Papo and Eduardo Moliniri, were chefs in training but have relied on these new public cleaning jobs since the pandemic began, and have been observing the city's streets for months.
"I don't think everyone out is an essential worker," Papo said. "If I had the possibility of working from home and getting my money from home I would. I wish I had that privilege. We are international students. If we are at home we get zero dollars."
She said stage three wasn't enough to keep people home. "Before people weren't respecting it … Since the old lockdown starts, no difference. They were out meeting with friends and hugging."
But fewer people means less disinfecting work, Moliniri said. The pair have already had their hours cut by four a week.
"As international students, I hope that Australia can start to see us as people that are helping the country, doing this work … We are going to be really struggling in this next lockdown."
As lunchtime approached central Melbourne was almost empty, with just a handful of stores bothering to open their doors.
For retailers, Monday was a waiting game. Sunday's press conference promised sweeping changes for Victorian business, with thousands likely to be forced to close. Everyone was wondering if they would be in the line of fire.
"It's been looming over us … I'm pretty anxious in terms of knowing what will happen," said Jack Cheng, who runs a variety store on Elizabeth Street.
Hewas was still hopeful his business would be classified as essential by the state government: "The party supply side has just gone down the drain but I'm hoping the discounts goods and variety bit might make the cut."
"If we have to close we will have a loss of income, we will have to speak to the landlord about rent and all that. I'm just really hoping we can get through all this."
Lawyers and paralegals make up a large contingent of those still working in the city.
Brittany Allen, who is employed at a criminal law firm, said she doesn't know if Monday will be her last day of work for weeks.
"I'm feeling a bit overwhelmed … I think yesterday's news just left more questions left unanswered," she said.
"But we all just have to do the right thing and hopefully get through this."