NRL and AFL crowd capacities to be reduced amid Covid-19 concerns
The capacity at Melbourne's home ground on the Sunshine Coast will be reduced by 1,000 after concerns were raised by the NRL and Storm about social distancing, while AFL crowds at the Adelaide Oval will also be cut back – to a maximum of 10,000 – after South Australia recorded two new coronavirus cases.
The NRL and Storm were in contact with the Queensland government on Monday morning after vision of the stadium appeared to show a packed hill for their Sunday afternoon NRL win over Newcastle.
Under Queensland government rules, venues can be filled to 50% capacity as they ease out of coronavirus restrictions. The stadium's crowd of 5,437 fell well inside that mark, with the venue able to hold up to 12,500, and it was claimed there were only 2,830 on the hill on Sunday.
The Queensland government said the number of overall fans permitted would in future be reduced to 5,250.
Queensland chief health officer Dr. Jeanette Young said there were five health officials at the ground to enforce social distancing but she said that a hill made it more difficult than a usual seated venue.
She said her body would review the situation as it would prove more difficult to contact-trace people who didn't sit in allocated seating.
At NRL matches in NSW the restriction on the hill is one person per four square metres rather than a percentage of capacity, which is why grounds such as Kogarah Oval looked empty in comparison to Sunshine Coast Stadium.
"We do need to go and review that because it is hard to maintain social distancing when you're sitting on the ground," Young said on Monday. "I saw people trying to do that, they were on separate rugs for separate household groups but we just have to have another look at that.
"They followed the rule but looking at it, because it's not a traditional seated stadium with proper seats, I think it's a bit harder to maintain that distance. They'll work through just how to make it a bit safer – that 50% cap is better designed for where you've got formal seating."
The Storm are due to play again at the ground on Saturday when they face Canterbury.
South Australian premier Steven Marshall on Monday announced a range of restrictions that will have an impact on the AFL. About 18,000 people have been attending recent Port Adelaide and Adelaide home AFL games but hopes the legal capacity would be increased later in the season have been dashed.
"We set ourselves a goal to go up to 25[000], but we have never actually been at 25,000," Marshall said. "We're working with the [Adelaide Oval] stadium management authority and we're looking at revising their Covid management plan.
"It's likely to rest at around 10,000 outdoor spectators, plus a number of people in venues that are contained at the oval."
Ticket-holders to Monday night's game between Port Adelaide and the Western Bulldogs won't be impacted. Adelaide Oval will also host Adelaide's clash with Melbourne on Wednesday night.