'We'll see bankruptcies': how coronavirus has shut down Australian film and TV
With Covid-19 restrictions closing at least 60 shoots and leaving 20,000 people out of work, the industry is fearful of how long it will take to recover
For many Australians, the news that Tom Hanks had come down with Covid-19 in Brisbane was the moment when the reality of the Coronavirus pandemic really sank in.
Hanks has recovered, but for the Australian film industry the prognosis is more serious.
Hanks was in Australia shooting Baz Luhrmann's forthcoming Elvis biopic, in which he plays music manager Colonel Tom Parker.
With Hanks off the set and cast and crew potentially exposed to the virus, production was halted. Luhrmann sent out a tweet on 20 March announcing the postponement.
Luhrmann's production is perhaps the highest profile screen victim of Covid-19 in Australia, but it's certainly not the only one. Social distancing regulations have made filming impossible, and sudden border closures have seen international crew urgently booking flights home. According to industry body Screen Producers Australia, at least 60 productions in Australia have now shut, including Shang Chi, Wakefield, Home and Away, Harrow, Back to the Rafters, Australian Survivor, Big Brother, Australia's Got Talent, and, as of Friday, the Bachelor.
The local screen sector employs around 25,000 Australians, and contributes more than $3bn to the economy annually, according to a 2016 study by Screen Australia and Deloitte Access Economics. Like the rest of the Australian arts industry, it has been plunged into chaos and uncertainty by the coronavirus crisis – but we're hearing less about film and TV because decisions have been more piecemeal; publicly announcing that a shoot has been stopped is more complicated – and involves more stakeholders – than announcing a venue is closed.
Screen Producers Australia believes at least 60 shoots around the country have had to postpone or cancel, with around 20,000 people being stood down, put on unpaid hiatus, or losing their jobs altogether. But Matthew Deaner, that organisation's CEO, says even that number is likely to be an underestimate. According to their preliminary survey, the economic impact is at least $195m in postponed production spending – but that figure will likely increase as more productions are shut or delayed. "There's not a lot of fat to cut," he said. "It's going to be a real strain. We'll see bankruptcies."
Production designer Fiona Donovan has worked in the Australian industry for 27 years. This is the worst downturn she's seen.
"It was pretty bad in the early 2000s, but this? It's just across the board, there's nothing; you can't get work anywhere, even the networks are closing shoots down. Even Fox Sports is stopping – there's no sport!"
Donovan was working on the Back to the Rafters reboot when the Covid-19 stop order came down. "We'd spent the last couple of weeks all wondering what would happen. The producers had been doing what they can to keep us safe, the safety protocols were getting more and more stringent." Then an extra on the shoot tested positive. "A whole lot of the crew had to go into self-isolation."
Like hundreds of thousands of Australians this week, Donovan has applied to Centrelink for welfare benefits. "We're mainly sole-traders and freelancers, so most of us don't have a lot to fall back on," she said. "When you're starting out, you are literally living from paycheck to paycheck. Some of my crew were in tears."
Prominent Brisbane-based production house Hoodlum has had to shut two of its key shoots, Harrow and Five Bedrooms. "We are gutted," Hoodlum's executive producer Nathan Mayfield wrote in an email.
Mayfield estimates these two closures alone will affect more than 400 cast and crew. "We take our duty of care very seriously ... we believe it is the right decision to comply in every way we can," Mayfield added. "The impacts will be felt for years to come if we don't … put the right measures in place to make sure we can all hit the ground running as soon as we can."
Aquarius Films' managing director Rachel Okine has worked for FilmFour, Hopscotch, Studiocanal and STX across a 20-year career in production. When she spoke to Guardian Australia this week, she had just had to postpone work on a TV series that was meant to go into pre-production this week. "I can't go into specifics, but obviously it leaves a huge hole in cashflow for 2020," she said. "There's now a big blank space where production fees would have been."
Okine says the uncertainty around Covid-19 has major downstream implications, too. "There's the uncertainty for us, in terms of when we can reschedule pre-production." And with crew based around the world, travel bans pose extra challenges. "Our lead director is based in Los Angeles, and that makes it extra complicated. We may need to completely rethink the production methodology."
Okine added that she was in "daily discussions" with insurance firms about completion guarantees and other cover required to operate. "There's so many people affected, so many more people than I realised."
With production stopped and the pipeline halted, there will be much less Australian content hitting our screens in the months and years to come – to say nothing of the global situation, with major productions around the world being cancelled, distributors delaying releases and cinemas shutting their doors.
Smaller firms are feeling it too. In Alice Springs, Rachel Clements from Brindle Films was scheduled to start pre-production of a children's series, MaveriX, in June. "We're in limbo," she said.
The fledgling screen sector in the Territory is particularly vulnerable to a downturn at this point, with shoots currently impossible and finance uncertain down the track. "We've got a very emerging industry in the Territory – there's a lot of documentary makers here, everyone is scared," she said. "If we get pushed back or are unable to go into pre-production, it's going to affect the entire NT industry."
Screen Producers Australia's Deaner is looking for a policy response from the federal government to help the industry weather the storm.
"We're going to have nothing happening for quite a long time," he said. "The real challenge is how long it takes to reboot."
Screen businesses will be able to access some of Scott Morrison's stimulus measures, and out of work cast and crew will be able to apply for Centrelink. But SPA would like to see further stimulus now to save as many productions as possible, as well as insurance guarantees and a temporary increase in production offsets to help prime the pump when the threat finally abates.
"If we can keep the core teams together by doing some work and some production moving forward – if the clouds lift, you've got an opportunity to roll that out."