Eastern Australia's coronavirus hotspots revealed: map shows affluent Sydney suburbs hard hit
A map of Australia's Covid-19 cases shows Waverley in Sydney's east is most affected, with high numbers in wealthy Melbourne suburbs
New data has revealed the coronavirus hotspots on Australia's east coast, showing a number of locations where community transmission of Covid-19 is increasing.
Figures released this week by the Victorian and NSW health departments map confirmed Covid-19 cases by local government area, giving the most detailed picture yet of where the coronavirus has spread.
NSW has 1,405 confirmed cases, with seven deaths, making it the hardest hit state. Sydney's eastern and northern suburbs are hotspots.
Waverley, in Sydney's eastern suburbs, is the council area with the highest number of cases at 105. Of these, at least eight people acquired the infection without any known contact with a confirmed case or travel overseas.
This week, the council was forced to shut down Bondi Beach after thousands of people went to the beach despite social distancing recommendations.
Nearby Woollahra has 66 cases and Sydney City 69.
There are several areas in Sydney's northern suburbs with high numbers: 68 cases in the northern beaches and 33 in Ryde. Hornsby, in Sydney's north-west, has 31 cases, eight of which have no known source.
To the south-west, Canterbury Bankstown has 44 cases.
Outside of Sydney, NSW Health has identified a cluster of cases in Wollongong (34), although not all of those infected live in the area. This is one of eight active clusters in the state.
The Central Coast has reported 44 cases and Newcastle 26.
Victoria has 520 cases, with three deaths. The Stonnington council area, which includes the affluent suburbs of Toorak, Malvern and Prahran, has the highest number of cases at 57.
Next is the Mornington Peninsula (36), holiday hub and home to popular retirement spots for wealthy Melbournians such as Sorrento and Portsea.
Melbourne CBD is third (32), followed by Boroondara (29), Glen Eira (26), Port Phillip (25) and Moreland (23).
Several regional areas have also been hit.
Greater Geelong has 21 cases. This includes a cluster at Geelong Grammar, with five parents who attended a cocktail evening contracting the virus, as well as a senior boarding student.
The regional city of Ballarat also has five cases.
Queensland has 493 cases with one death. Data from that state is less detailed, and is mapped by larger hospital and health service regions rather than council area.
However, it is clear suburbs around Brisbane are bearing the brunt of the infection.
The city's metro-north and south areas have 264 cases.
The Gold Coast has 91 cases, and the Sunshine Coast 56.
The next biggest infection areas are the Darling Downs and West Moreton, with 17 cases each.
According to Queensland Health, the majority of cases are from patients who have travelled overseas or have had direct contact with a confirmed case.