Coronavirus: medical association warns Australia must protect medical supplies amid reports of stockpiling by China-backed firm in February
AMA's call follows report Sydney staff were instructed to source bulk medical items to send to China as virus took hold in Wuhan
The Australian Medical Association is warning that the nation needs to protect its stocks of face masks, suits and other protective equipment amid reports that a Chinese property company in Sydney diverted its staff to purchasing medical equipment during January and February.
The Sydney Morning Herald reported that as the coronavirus took hold in Wuhan earlier this year, staff from the Sydney office of the Chinese government-backed global property giant Greenland Group were instructed to put their normal work on hold and source bulk supplies of essential medical items to ship back to China.
According to the report, a whistleblower from the company told the Herald it was a worldwide effort by Greenland and the Sydney office was no different, sourcing bulk supplies of surgical masks, thermometers, antibacterial wipes, hand sanitisers, gloves and Panadol for shipping.
The Greenland Group reportedly confirmed the shipment of medical supplies in January and February, saying it "felt compelled ... to assist in efforts to mitigate the spread of the virus, which had caused a shortage of crucial medical supplies in China".
The Department of Health has said there is currently significant pressure on stocks of all consumables used by laboratories, but the extent to which shortages are due to the exporting of supplies to other countries is unclear.
Comment has been sought from customs officials.
The South Australian AMA president, Dr Chris Moy, has said the most important issue is to avoid wasting masks and other equipment.
Stopping elective surgery was an important first step but it also involved curbing "misuse of gear in situations where it was not needed", he said. "Some people are using P2 masks [which offer higher protection] where a normal surgical mask is sufficient."
There are also concerns about theft becoming an issue as the Covid-19 crisis advances.
"It's my understanding that a lack of PPE was a major issue in Italy," Moy said. "It was not just misuse but also theft by staff in hospitals and surgeries.
"It's understandable that people might want to get masks for their families but it puts the lives of frontline staff at risk if stocks are taken. We must keep stores for the Covid storm that is coming."
Moy said there had been a level of "push and pull" at the global level over supplies of crucial medical equipment, with reports of ships being diverted and price gouging. "We have to do whatever we can to secure supplies."
The level of supplies varies substantially between each state, with South Australia said to have greater stockpiles than other states.
Moy also warned it was important to avoid substandard or counterfeit protective equipment circulating in Australia. He said he had heard that some shipments had been held back by customs officials for this reason.