NSW Tafe courses to be suspended amid coronavirus pandemic
Government halts programs until at least the end of April, although a few courses, including nursing and aged care, will continue
The vast majority of Tafe courses in New South Wales will be suspended from Monday after weeks of crisis talks amid the worsening coronavirus outbreak.
As the number of confirmed cases of the virus rose above 1,000 for the first time in NSW on Wednesday, the state government announced the suspension of Tafe courses until at least the end of April. Only a few courses, including nursing and aged care, will continue.
"These measures are being implemented in line with the latest advice from health authorities, and are aimed at maintaining the safe, orderly operation of Tafe NSW campuses while minimising risk to students and staff," a spokesperson said.
In the meantime, the government says it will embark on an ambitious plan to train the state's 5,000 Tafe teachers in the online delivery of as many as 1,200 courses. From 27 April, the government says, Tafe will recommence through a mix of "connected and blended delivery".
"This may include face-to-face delivery, where necessary and adequate social distancing measures can be implemented. Teachers will discuss arrangements directly with their students over the next few weeks," the Tafe spokesman said.
That vocational education has continued virtually unchanged during the broad shutdown of Australian society has largely gone unnoticed. While universities have largely cleared their campuses and primary and secondary schools have begun moving online, Tafe students in NSW were being told to attend classes in person as recently as Monday.
The situation is even murkier for the more than 4,000 private vocational colleges in Australia. Those colleges, which are accredited through the Australian Skills Quality Authority, often have requirements for in-person learning attached to government funding they receive.
While regulators have been trying to ease those conditions to allow providers to shift to online learning, many vocational education courses are by their nature collaborative and require in-person learning.
As one industry insider told the Guardian, a long-term shift to only online learning ran the risk of creating a pool of under-qualified graduates in important sectors such as manufacturing or dental care.
Private colleges are also free to continue operating even while state-run vocational education is shut down.
As a spokesman for the NSW minister for skills, Geoff Lee, told the Guardian: "We don't have any influence over the operations of the private providers [although] we encourage them to follow the health advice".
There are even more vexed issues for English language colleges across Australia, a $2.4bn industry that has seen its entire market collapse following the introduction of travel bans for foreign nationals.
Brett Blacker, the chief executive of English Australia, a representative body for the sector, told the Guardian the industry was "on the edge of the cliff".
"As a sector that relies 100% on foreign nationals we have no future enrolments at the moment," he said.
"So the most pressing issue is that current students are completing courses or leaving and going home and colleges are facing the fact they're going to have no students to teach in the very near future – we're talking weeks.
"We're on the edge of the cliff and facing potentially widespread closures, which will have a significant impact on Australia's ability to rebound as an education provider for international students at any future point."
English Australia represents 120 of Australia's 340 registered English language colleges. Blacker said that about 70% of graduates at those colleges went into some kind of further education and that the risk was not just to private colleges but the viability of Australia's lucrative international education market.
"In terms of the wider education industry we're often seen as a canary in the coalmine," he said. "Historically when there's dips for us it flows into other sectors, but at the moment we're looking at a total wipeout unless we can provide support."
Creating even further difficulties for colleges – and stress for teachers who remain required to teach in small classrooms of often 10 or more students – is the fact that because visa conditions for international students often require in-person English language instruction, many colleges are not currently equipped to move to online learning.
An English language teacher at a private college in the Melbourne CBD told Guardian Australia that her college was essentially running classes as "business as usual".
"The idea is to go online eventually but the college is worried that a lot of students are going to want their money back," she said.
And for many international students, she said, online study was not an option regardless of whether regulators relaxed conditions around in-person study.
"Most students would find it really difficult to study online anyway," the teacher said.
"They can't go to a cafe or a library and they often live in apartments in the CBD where their room is shared between two or three other people.
"I love my students [but] it does feel like a disaster waiting to happen."