Coronavirus Australia latest: 24 March at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
On Tuesday evening Scott Morrison announced a range of new economic and social measures to deal with the impact of the coronavirus.From midnight on Wednesday food courts in shopping centres will only be available for takeaway food, auctions and open house inspections are banned, outdoor and indoor markets are banned while rules around major food markets will be addressed by states and territories.
Personal services such as beauty therapy and tattoo parlours (but not physiotherapy) are banned. Hairdressers and barbers can continue but must strictly manage social distancing and restrict the amount of time a patron can be in the premises to no more than 30 minutes.
Amusement parks and arcades, and indoor and outdoor play centres must close, but boot camps and personal training can continue if limited to 10 people. Galleries, museums, libraries and swimming pools must close.
Weddings can continue to be conducted where it is just the couple the celebrant and two witnesses, no more than five people. Funerals are limited to no more than 10 people.
All Australians will be barred from leaving the country to travel overseas, with small exceptions for some aid workers and vital government duties.
Morrison says it is clear from the numbers of people still travelling that some are defying advice not to travel anywhere in the world.
Small exceptions will be made for aid workers and other vital government travel.
A woman in her 70s who was a passenger on the Ruby Princess died on Tuesday morning. She was one of three passengers from the cruise ship who initially tested positive for Covid-19. The woman had been taken from the ship to hospital on 19 March.
One hundred and thirty-three passengers from the Ruby Princess have now tested positive to Covid-19: 107 in NSW and 26 interstate.
The ship was given permission to dock in Sydney and passengers were allowed to disembark. The woman is the eighth fatality from the virus in Australia.
Australian regulators have urgently approved the supply of rapid Covid-19 testing kits to doctors at clinics and hospitals. The kit allows doctors to screen patients for the virus within 15 minutes.
The Therapeutic Goods Administration has granted four approvals to companies to sell the product locally. One of the companies, Melbourne-based MD Solutions, will begin importing the tests within a fortnight.
The tests are designed for initial screening only and require two drops of blood. They do not require laboratory processing before a result is returned.
The A-League was postponed on Tuesday morning, bringing all top level sport to a halt due to the coronavirus pandemic. Football Federation Australia announced on the competition would be put on hold for the foreseeable future with the "heartbreaking" decision to suspend competition to be reviewed on 22 April.
FFA remains optimistic the 2020 season can resume at some stage, but conceded the decision could affect its finances.
"We will feel this. We will feel the financial pressure on the game at all levels. "The game will survive ... will we need to make changes? Be different? I say yes," FFA's chief executive, James Johnson, said.
The Australian sharemarket closed up 4.2% on Tuesday, almost clawing back losses from Monday. Despite the solid performance, the market is still down by more than a third from where it was a month ago, before it was gripped by a coronavirus-inspired selling frenzy.And several big companies that are most affected by the pandemic are suspended from trade, meaning they cannot weigh down the benchmark ASX 200 index.Graincorp shed more than 50%, but its drop was not coronavirus-related – today was the first day of trade for its malting arm, which it has spun off into a separate company.Consumer-exposed financial stocks that were sold heavily on Monday bounced back, with debt collector Credit Corp up by 46% and buy-now-pay-later operator Afterpay up by 26%.
The Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the state's border will be open to freight and essential travel only from midnight on Wednesday. Queensland police will set up checkpoints along the border to enforce the new rules.
Those exempted from the new restrictions include freight, people travelling to or from work, people attending court and emergency service workers or people travelling for medical treatment.
Health authorities confirmed there had been 78 newly confirmed cases of Covid-19 between Monday and Tuesday, taking Queensland's total to 397.
For the second day in a row long queues formed outside Centrelink offices around the country as thousands of people affected by the coronavirus crisis sought financial assistance.
Anne Ruston, the social services minister, urged people to go on the MyGov website, instead of lining up.
"The day that you actually start your application with Centrelink will be the day from which you'll be eligible to receive your payment," she said.
"So we would be asking the Australian public for calm, because we need to make sure these services are open for those people who really are in the most desperate need for them."
But the site continued to have issues. Users struggled to access it due to the extremely high demand. Ruston said on Tuesday the government had increased the site's capacity to 150,000 users.
The government clarified that people not already registered with Centrelink did not have to go to an office to get a customer reference number (CRN). This can be done over the phone.
SBS confirmed a case of coronavirus in its Sydney newsroom and the SBS World News with Anton Enus was to be presented out of Canberra on Tuesday night.
An unidentified newsroom staff member tested positive for the virus and was sent home.
They were last in the Sydney headquarters of SBS on Friday, staff were told by management.
The newsroom was shut for the day and was being sanitised.