Union agrees to alter hospitality award in bid to save job losses due to coronavirus
Move is necessary to protect some of the 1m hospitality jobs at risk across Australia, union chief says
In a desperate bid to salvage hospitality jobs during the Covid-19 pandemic, the United Workers Union has agreed with the Australian Hotels Association to cut minimum hours requirements and suspend rules on job classifications.
It has also agreed to relax the rules on when staff can be directed to take leave.
Monday's closure of all bars, restaurants, hotels and clubs threatens nearly 1m hospitality jobs. Many casual staff have already been told they are no longer needed and have joined the long lines outside Centrelink offices. The hospitality sector accounts for more than 8% of jobs in Australia.
Employers and unions reached the extraordinary agreement on Tuesday and made a joint application to the Fair Work Commission to suspend rules in the hospitality award.
Several other unions and employer groups are in consultations about temporary changes to awards.
The national president of the United Workers Union, Jo-anne Schofield, said: "As the Fair Work Commission full bench hears this application, there are close to a million hospitality workers across the country facing cuts to their hours, being stood down, or losing their jobs.
"Our hospitality members want job security and certainty above all else, and we hope this variation will help to deliver this," she said.
"Altering the award temporarily is an important step to help protect workers and their shifts during this unprecedented time," she said.
She said the agreement required consultation with workers about any change.
"Penalty rates, allowances and job security are all preserved."
The chief executive of the Australian Hotels Association, Stephen Ferguson, said the peak body had decided to move ahead before other groups to keep businesses operating and save jobs, noting it had a good relationship with the union.
"Our employer members are at the coalface of this crisis," he said. "Other sectors and industries are not as hard hit."
The hospitality award covers pubs, casinos and hotels, as well as bars and restaurants within hotels, most of which were shut down by the government's closure of non-essential services.
Some hotels are still operating where they offer accommodation, but with skeleton staff and at just 10%-20% capacity.
Some restaurants and cafes are operating on delivery and takeaway basis.