Jacinda Ardern asks for coronavirus relief for New Zealanders banned from Australia's welfare
NZ PM says she made a direct appeal for a temporary change to the rules to allow laid-off New Zealanders living in Australia to access benefits
The New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, is urging her Australian counterpart, Scott Morrison, to allow New Zealand citizens living and working in Australia access to welfare benefits as the Covid-19 pandemic triggers mass unemployment across the country.
Speaking on Tuesday, Ardern said she had raised the issue directly with Morrison, with a specific request for a "a short-term exemption" to Centrelink restrictions on the more than 650,000 New Zealanders living and working in Australia.
"I have raised this issue with prime minister Morrison. I have specifically sought … a short-term exemption, just for these exceptional circumstances for New Zealanders to be supported, not least because it will encourage compliance at a time when we need everyone to be self-isolating if they had to, for instance," Ardern said.
"That is not something that has happened at this time, but it is something that has been raised by both the deputy prime minister and myself with our counterparts."
Labor also urged the government to use expanded powers endorsed by the Senate on Monday night to allow the more than 1.6 million temporary visa holders in Australia immediate access to special benefit payments to prevent hundreds of "trapped" migrants who lose work becoming destitute.
The social services minister, Anne Ruston, said on Tuesday that under new regulations passed by the parliament, she was able to make any necessary changes to the payment system to deal with the "evolving situation" caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, including in relation to special benefits.
The special benefit payment is currently accessed by only about 7,000 people and is available to people in "financial distress" who are not otherwise eligible for Centrelink benefits. The most recent data available from the Department of Social Services suggests the payment is predominantly made to those over 65, and people born in Iran and China.
The shadow home affairs minister, Kristina Keneally, has been pushing the government to make provisions for temporary visa holders in Australia, who are "soon to be trapped here with varying levels of healthcare and no access to income support".
The government has said that the special benefit payment is available to people on a range of visas, including temporary partner visas, temporary humanitarian visas, bridging visas for victims of human trafficking, and temporary residents on skilled visas.But so far there are no provisions for most of the temporary visa holders currently living and working in Australia, including the more than 650,000 New Zealanders who have access to the health system, but not Centrelink benefits.
Debbie Baird, a New Zealander living in Geelong, said the restrictions on New Zealanders who had been in Australia for less than 10 years being able to access the special benefit felt like "another kick in the teeth".
"We're out in the cold yet again. It's hard being a New Zealander in this country," Baird said.
"We are part of this society, we live here and work here and we pay our taxes here. We contribute, but now we're left out again."
Baird said she remained in employment, but had heard from many in her community who'd been left without work or hope of government assistance, and facing destitution.
"We need to support each other, a little bit of the Anzac spirit to help each other out. No one asked for this horrible virus to come, we need to work together."On Tuesday, Ruston said the government had already scrapped the waiting period for people on the path to citizenship to allow them access to benefits.
"There are a range of different visas [and] I am currently working my way through those visa types to see what options there are available to assist those people," Ruston said.
"I already have the capacity … to grant what we call special benefit to those people on visas that would not otherwise be eligible to Australian social security payments if they are in a time of financial hardship, but yesterday we supercharged those powers by the regulation last night, which means that I can look more broadly at all of them."
Concerns have also been raised about the 141,000 working holiday visa holders in the country. Many work in the hospitality sector that has been all but shut down across the country.Twenty-four-year old Popi, a newspaper journalist from Argentina who preferred not to give her last name, had just completed the 88 days of regional work required to extend her working holiday visa when Covid-19 broke out in Australia.
She had moved back to Wollongong and was offered a job at a bar, which then rang to tell her there was no longer any job. A cafe where she worked cut her hours from 14 to six – not enough to cover her rent – with a risk of further cuts again.
"It's understandable, it's no one's fault, but the situation is desperate. I cannot go back to my country because the borders are closed, all the flights are cancelled, if I stay here, I will soon use up all of my savings, and we are not allowed any help from the government
Popi says she counts herself as "one of the lucky ones": her partner is Australian so they have some family support.
"But I have so many friends who are in hard situations. They are here by themselves, there is no support from the government, they cannot go home to their countries, and their visas are about to expire. They are going to be illegal, and it's not their fault, but there is no resolution."