'How will they police it?' Tweed Heads and Coolangatta brace for Queensland border lockdown
Queensland has announced it will close its border with NSW, but some residents need to cross it to leave their own driveways
Some Tweed Heads residents cannot leave their driveway without crossing an unmarked border from New South Wales into Queensland. Locals point out a well-known spot where cars park straddling the border to avoid the attention of parking rangers on both sides.
On Tuesday the Queensland government announced its borders would close from Wednesday night. From midnight police would enforce a permit system allowing only freight and other essential travel.
The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said the '"extraordinary measures" were not aimed at stopping people who needed to cross the border to work, shop or attend medical appointments.
"They are to stop holidaymakers leaving southern states and risking the spread of this virus through Queensland," she said in a statement released on Tuesday.
"People should stay in their own states and in their own suburbs. That applies to Queensland as well. People in the south-east should not travel to other parts of the state.
"Do not go on holidays. Do not travel unless absolutely necessary."
Exemptions were: freight, emergency vehicles, emergency workers, those travelling to and from work, court orders including family court, compassionate grounds and medical treatment.
Residents have been told they can obtain permits to cross the border, and police will conduct RBT-style checks to ensure compliance.
Details of how the scheme would work had yet to filter through to residents whose lives straddle the border.
Whether such a system can be enforced is another thing. In Coolangatta, on the Queensland side of the border, many shop workers say they live in New South Wales.
The Tweed shire mayor, Katie Milne, told Guardian Australia her council had been left "very much in the dark" and raised concern the closures would cause traffic delays for essential and emergency service workers heading in both directions.
"We've got 8,000 Tweed residents who work on the Gold Coast (and) we're very worried about how that is going to be managed," Milne said.
"There are 5,000 Gold Coast residents who work in the Tweed. There are a lot of friends and family who live on either side, the communities are very intertwined.
"There's a lot of questions and we would have really loved to have been consulted. I do appreciate the (Queensland) premier's intent, and I understand where she's coming from but the practicalities are extremely difficult."
Milne said she was particularly concerned about the impact on medical staff who crossed the border daily to go to work.
"We now have a bit of an understanding about how they will manage the freeway (but) still don't really know what is going to happen on local roads.
"We don't know who is going to manage that traffic congestion and whether we are supposed to have our workers out there in Hazmat suits to cop the abuse.
Mick, who works in a Queensland bottle shop part-time, said he took the bus across the border to work.
"We're going to get busy because the pubs are shut," he said.
"I don't know what's going to happen. I'm in the dark like everyone else.
"I take the bus and I don't know whether they're going to keep running. If we need a permit, how are they going to police it? There's a lot of ways in and out. I don't understand why it's needed, when the virus is everywhere.
Nathalie Cochrane, the manager of coffee shop Little Mali at Coolangatta, also lives on the New South Wales side of the border. The cafe is on the Queensland side of Boundary Street; the apartment complexes across the road are in NSW.
"A lot of people have been saying to us today, 'I won't see you for a while because I can't cross the border to get a coffee'," Cochrane said.
"A lot of customers live across the road. Obviously places in NSW are closed down. I don't know how it's going to work. You can be walking on the beach and end up in NSW or Queensland.
"I don't know if I'll be able to get in, if I will qualify for a permit."
"I don't know how they are going to monitor every street. We have a lot of cops who come in here and they say they don't even have enough people to be at every point."
Cochrane said the cafe had been surviving on take-away trade since dine-in restrictions were enforced, but that they would inevitably have to cut back on staff.
Matthew Miller lives in an apartment block on the south side of Binya Avenue. The street is unique because the border cuts through the southern side, not the middle of the roadway.
"So basically to cross the border, we drive across the verge and into the street," Miller said.
The same applies for a retirement village in the street; the complex is mostly within NSW, but the access road crosses the border before entering Binya Avenue.
"I don't think they're going to be here policing us or anything. But my car has a NSW licence plate. The quickest way to the get to the main street you'd probably cross the border another two times. It's a bit weird."