National cabinet to consider lockdowns for coronavirus hotspots and help for renters
State and federal leaders to meet again after Scott Morrison tells Australians to brace for 'the most difficult year of our lives'
Advice on locking down coronavirus hotspots, new financial assistance measures for renters and further shutdowns of non-essential services will be considered by the national cabinet of state and federal leaders on Tuesday.
As the country faces the prospect of more business closures aimed at slowing the spread of the virus, the meeting will also look at keeping business supply chains in place, and measures to ensure workforce continuity in critical industries.
With thousands of Australians still scrambling to return home, it is also understood some members of the cabinet have also flagged putting in place a deadline for overseas and interstate travellers to return to their home state before beginning a period of self-isolation.
Tuesday's meeting comes after prime minister, Scott Morrison, told Australians on Monday to brace for "the most difficult year of our lives" and as parliament was set to pass legislation to allow $189bn in economic support to begin flowing into the economy.
On Monday, MPs approved a new sitting schedule, with parliament set to resume on 11 August, although some expect it may not sit again until October. The government set aside another $40bn in an annual discretionary fund that could be used for purchasing emergency medical supplies and another wave of stimulus.
Legislation for the government packages announced so far passed the Senate on Monday night, after the Coalition agreed to Labor and Greens' calls to extend the $550 fortnightly coronavirus supplement to students on Youth Allowance, Austudy and Abstudy recipients, which could see 250,000 more people receive extra payments.
The last meeting of state and territory leaders, held on Sunday, was overshadowed by inconsistency and confusion among the states on the issue of school closures, and the move to shut down non-essential services.
On Sunday afternoon, Victoria and New South Wales both flagged they would be shutting down all non-essential services and schools, prompting a flurry of speculation that this would soon be the national position.
However, the meeting ultimately agreed to a limited first stage of shutdowns, with places of social gathering such as pubs, clubs, bars, cafes and religious institutions all closing across the country on Monday.
The national cabinet also agreed to keep schools open, despite states all approaching the issue differently ahead of the Easter break.
Asked why state announcements were made in advance of national cabinet on Sunday, the ACT chief minister, Andrew Barr, told reporters in Canberra the national cabinet had now agreed that "one of the things that needs to happen because of that confusion, we need to meet more frequently".
He said some of the confusion was because the meeting had originally been scheduled for Tuesday.
"One of the challenges that we are grappling with is that the situation in different parts of the country, in terms of community transmission for example, is different. And so some jurisdictions are under more immediate pressure to respond more quickly," Barr said.
"And so the national cabinet has to account for that. So we've had that discussion, we all recognise in light of what happened late last night, in terms of a sense of confused messaging, that we can and should do better, and we will."
Asked if Victoria and NSW made announcements to pressure national cabinet, Barr declined to offer a "running commentary" on the process, but reiterated the ACT would work through the national cabinet and seek to maintain consistency with NSW.
Guardian Australia understands that following Sunday afternoon's confusion, the cabinet meeting was presented with advice from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee to limit the shutdown to places of social mingling as an initial move which was unanimously agreed to. The advice on schools was unchanged.
However, the state leaders were told that the social distancing measures could soon be upgraded, with further restrictions to be considered at each meeting.
While Morrison said on Sunday that closures would be reviewed monthly, there was an expectation that discussion about the next stage of shutdowns could take place as soon as Tuesday given how quickly the advice is being reviewed.
A "stage two" list of non-essential businesses has already been prepared by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee in anticipation.
The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said it was "inevitable" that further restrictions would be announced, and insisted there was no friction in Sunday's meeting.
"It's a first step," he said.
Andrews also said that Australians should not gather internally for social occasions with pubs now closed, in a statement that seemed at odds with Morrison's position on the existing social distancing measures.
"It doesn't mean you can have your mates over home and get on the beers, it is not appropriate," Andrews said.
Morrison, however, said that non-essential indoor gatherings should be limited to less than one person per four square metres.
"It will be absolutely vital that every Australian respects and follows the healthy social distancing measures that all Australian governments have implemented in order to flatten this curve and save lives."
The chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, said on Monday that while Australia still had a very low death rate, the number of cases was mounting, and the country needed to "stop and slow and control community transmission".
Murphy said the issue of schools closures was a "very vexed issue" and said that while the current assessment of the balance of risks was that it was better to keep schools open, this may change.
He also issued a firm warning on social distancing, warning that people, particularly young people, should not respond in a "cavalier" manner.
"Your transmission and your spread of the virus could lead to a serious and even fatal disease in one of your elderly relatives or friends."