'Clear as mud': schools ask for online learning help as coronavirus policy confusion persists
Despite national cabinet process aiming for consistency, states and territories now have a patchwork of responses
New South Wales Catholic schools have asked for the government's help to take teaching online, warning it could take months to roll out and result in a "digital divide" between schools.
The chief executive of Catholic Schools NSW, Dallas McInerney, wrote to the NSW government on Tuesday seeking help, after the premier, Gladys Berejiklian, announced schools would stay open – although parents are encouraged to keep their children home where they can.
Despite the national cabinet process aiming to maintain a consistent response to Covid-19 across Australian jurisdictions, the states and territories now have a patchwork of responses on education.
Victoria has announced it will bring forward school holidays and close from Tuesday, the Australian Capital Territory is attempting to move to online learning like NSW, and schools in Queensland, Tasmania and Western Australia are remaining open, with the term break still three weeks away in Western Australia.
All states agreed that parents can choose to keep their children home, with absences increasing to up to 40% of students in some jurisdictions.
In the Catholic Schools NSW letter, seen by Guardian Australia, McInerney promised to "stay open, as directed" but sought help to deliver the "alternative mode of schooling for NSW" requested by Berejiklian.
"Over the coming months, Catholic schools will seek to make out‐of‐school and online learning available to students, however, I would like to strike a note of caution," he said.
"The capacity of schools, families and communities to make any such transition is not consistent across NSW, and expectations must be realistic.
"The incidence of a 'digital divide' is evident, geographically and socially.
"To mitigate against these equity issues, I urgently seek confirmation that all Catholic schools will have full access to the government's infrastructure and resources for online learning."
The Association of Independent Schools chief executive, Geoff Newcombe, said the decision to ask parents to keep children at home "reflects the fact that an increasing number of parents are already doing this".
"It makes sense therefore to advise all parents to keep their children at home and enable schools to teach students using a single 'learning from home' model," he said.
"All schools – including independent schools – will remain open and adequately staffed to ensure that learning can continue for children of essential services workers, children in need, and children of parents with no option other than to send their children to school."
The NSW government has been preparing schools for a shift to online learning since early in March, with the state's education minister, Sarah Mitchell, saying teachers had been directed to prepare online lessons for their classes.
But while dozens of private schools have already moved to online learning as the crisis worsens, teachers in the public sector have reported a mixed capacity to deliver classes online and expressed concern that many students at government schools may not have sufficient access to home internet.
"The best we could do is to upload generic resources linked to topics and hope for the best," one teacher based in Sydney's south who spoke to the Guardian on the condition of anonymity said.
"And that's assuming they all have access to computers and the internet at home. The other thing is though, I have two kids, so if schools were closed my capacity to check work would be severely limited because I would have to be looking after them."
Meanwhile, the Australian Education Union, the peak union for public sector teachers, has criticised the "major confusion" caused by differing statements from the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and state leaders.
"The issues for Covid-19 are real and are urgent. With requirements being imposed on many sectors in Australia it is time for the commonwealth and state and territory governments to enable schools to prepare for next term and the challenges ahead. We need a smooth transition process clearly outlined which protects staff and students" the AEU president, Correna Haythorpe, said.
"We are very concerned about our members and their ongoing health and safety. These are unprecedented times and we must all work together constructively to resolve the situation. However this requires leadership from government."
The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, announced school holidays would be brought forward to begin on Tuesday and schools would spend the remaining days this week "without kids at school to plan for remote, flexible, distance learning in the event that we need to move to that way of teaching and learning".
Schools in Victoria will return as planned on 14 April, unless health advice recommends otherwise.
The ACT minister, Yvette Berry, told reporters in Canberra the education directorate had not instructed schools to close, despite the ACT government publicly advertising from Tuesday schools would be "pupil free".
Berry acknowledged there was "unfortunate messaging" from some schools that this amounted to closure.
Instead of closure, the ACT plans to use several pupil free days to plan a shift to online learning, she said.
Schools will remain open with "no child turned away" so children of working parents, including essential service workers in aged care and health, can still attend.
On Monday the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, played down differences with NSW, insisting "no, New South Wales has said schools are open".
"And we have said that too," she told reporters in Brisbane. "We have said schools are open and parents can make that choice."
The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, blamed Scott Morrison's communication for the confusion on schools, saying the prime minister's press conference on Sunday was "as clear as mud" on the point of closures.
"And no wonder parents are confused out there," he told Radio National.
On Sunday, Morrison said there had been "no change to … the health advice, in relation to schools" to stay open.
"I don't want to see our children lose an entire year of their education," Morrison said. "That's what we're talking about here. This is very serious."
"What we will be doing, though, is allowing parents to the end of this year's school term to be able to keep their children home where they choose to.
"But for all of those parents who wish to send their children to school for an education at the school, those schools will remain open.
"In addition, schools will seek to provide learning at home in a distance learning framework. But you cannot be assured that that will come in place immediately."