Coronavirus Australia latest: 23 March at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
The Australian Olympic Committee told athletes to prepare for an Olympic Games in the northern summer of 2021, conceding that the Covid-19 pandemic meant the 2020 Tokyo Games were unlikely to proceed.
At an emergency teleconference on Monday morning, the AOC executive committee agreed a team could not be assembled given the impacts of the crisis in Australia and overseas.
Canada's Olympic committee also announced it would not send athletes to Tokyo this year.
Non-essential services closed across Australia from midday on Monday.
All registered and licensed pubs, clubs, casinos and nightclubs are closed. Cinemas and entertainment venues, gyms and indoor sporting venues. Restaurants and cafes are closed except for delivery and takeaway. Religious venues are closed, except for very small groups observing social distancing rules.
No weddings or funerals are allowed indoors, except in small groups observing the 1 person per 4sqm rule.
Supermarkets and shops remain open, including bottle shops, but people are being told not to congregate there, i.e. in foodcourts, and observe the social distancing rules.
Thousands of Australians queued outside Centrelink on Monday as the immediate economic effect of the shutdown of non-essential services began to be felt.
Huge lines, not seen in decades, extended several blocks outside Centrelink offices around the country. The government encouraged people to access welfare services through MyGov but the site was down for many people.
The government services minister Stuart Robert initially said the site had been subject to a cyber attack. But Robert was forced to take back his statement, telling parliament that it wasn't an attack but just the alarms that are designed to detect and stop DDoS attacks triggering due to the large volume of people trying to log in. The site can take just 55,000 people at once. At least 95,000 people tired to access it shortly after 9.30 am.
Up to a million additional people are expected to need the JobSeeker payment.
There has been confusion the past 48 hours over school closures. Victoria and the ACT are the only state and territory at present proceeding with school closures.
In New South Wales, the premier Gladys Berejiklian said schools would remain open but encouraged parents to keep their children home if possible.
Schools remain open elsewhere.
The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, announced the state was preparing to close its borders. More details will be announced on Tuesday.
What is already known is that the state will be closed to non-essential visitors from Wednesday. Residents will be able to return to the state but will be required to self-isolate for 14 days. Any visitors will also have to prove they can self-isolate.
The Queensland disaster management committee will meet on Tuesday to finalise the details.
Along with Queensland, borders will be shut in the NT, South Australia, WA and Tasmania.
There have been 250 cases of an undiagnosed respiratory illness reported on the cruise ship Magnifica, which is currently off the coast of Walpole in south-west Western Australia. There are 1,700 passengers on board and 250 have reported upper respiratory illnesses.The ship has sought permission to dock in Fremantle but WA's premier, Mark McGowan, said he would not allow passengers to disembark and "wander the streets". He said he had spoken to the Department of Home Affairs and the government about what could be done."I will not allow what happened in Sydney to happen here," he said. "This is a non-negotiable position … options are currently being developed the commonwealth, the defence forces and the state government."
The Australian market was down by about 6.8% at lunchtime Monday as the market struggled to digest the implications of sweeping new bans on hospitality and entertainment businesses.Trade in at least nine stocks was suspended or halted, with five companies within the ASX200 halted. Buy-now-pay-later company Afterpay was the biggest loser in the top 200, crashing by 35%. Southern Cross Media was the second-biggest loser, shedding nearly a third of its value.
The South Australian senator became the fourth federal politician to test positive for Covid-19. Patrick was tested after sharing a committee with government senator Andrew Bragg, who contracted Covid-19 at a wedding. In a Twitter post, Patrick said he was asymptomatic.
Labor senator Jenny McAllister was also tested after sitting on the same Senate committee with Bragg and Patrick but tested negative.