More than 130 Australian companies ready to boost PPE stock of coronavirus masks, gowns and gloves
Government trying to map out country's capacity to produce personal protective equipment for medical staff
More than 130 Australian companies have responded to an urgent call to dramatically boost the manufacturing of face masks, gowns and gloves, as doctors report that some staff are going to extraordinary lengths to conserve stocks.
The federal government has assured medical staff that stocks of personal protective equipment (PPE) are sufficient to deal with the immediate crisis posed by Covid-19.
New stock has been released from the emergency national medical stockpile, and the Guardian understands the Department of Industry has convened a special unit to consider PPE supplies. Soldiers have also been sent in to the Victorian medical supplier Med-Con to assist in production as the company attempts to double its supply of surgical masks.
Last week, the government issued a request for any company that might be able to produce PPE to come forward.
The request was designed to map out Australia's full capacity to produce PPE and to identify companies whose ability to manufacture it was not immediately apparent.
The industry department said more than 130 companies had come forward in response so far. The ultimate aim is to "significantly increase the production of PPE products", the department said.
The companies are being asked to detail how they can help to produce surgical gowns, gloves, goggles, hand sanitiser, clinical waste bags, waste bag closure devices, blood and fluid spill kits, mask fit test kits or thermometers.
The industry minister, Karen Andrews, said the government was moving quickly to ensure supply of PPE and expand domestic production.
"So many companies are putting up their hands to help – whether it's ramping up manufacturing, looking to switch up what they produce, or even just connecting with each other to make sure they have what they need," Andrews told the Guardian.
"This is a mighty challenge but our fighting spirit and Aussie ingenuity will ensure we get through this and come out stronger on the other side."
The World Health Organisation earlier this month urged all nations to lift their production of PPE by at least 40% and to remove export restrictions that are limiting global supply.
"Without secure supply chains, the risk to healthcare workers around the world is real," the WHO director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said. "Industry and governments must act quickly to boost supply, ease export restrictions and put measures in place to stop speculation and hoarding."
Despite the Australian government's initial actions, the Australian Medical Association, the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons and the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners have all warned of difficulties in obtaining PPE right across the health sector.
Sydney surgeon Ken Loi, chair of the RACS NSW state committee, said medical staff were taking care to conserve PPE stocks. Loi said the demands on PPE were unprecedented.
"We know that there are shortages, they are working on it," Loi told the Guardian. "We are working with government on sourcing more."
Loi said he had heard reports of medical staff having to reuse face masks. That practice is advised against when dealing with suspected Covid-19 cases.
"I certainly hear from some of my GP colleagues that they have to do that, but it depends on the screening of the patient. I think people are now much more selective about how they see patients," he said.
"If we have to reuse it, it's based on resources, and the government I believe is working on how we secure more supply."
Chris Moy, the AMA's president in South Australia, said the initial release of 20m masks from the national stockpile "wasn't even nearly enough". He said the shortages of PPE were being felt across all aspects of the health system.
"We are seeing it at the frontline, we are struggling," he said.
He said he was aware that the federal government was trying to find new sources of PPE.
"As doctors on the frontline, and all other types of workers, including aged care workers, we really need to get that distribution out if they've got stores," he said.
"If there isn't, we've got a significant problem."
Reports have emerged of price gouging on items such as face masks.
The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners said those reports were "very concerning". A spokesman said the college welcomed the opening up of the national medical stockpile to supply more PPE.
But he said: "We also know that these are unprecedented times and supplies are in high demand around the world. It's essential that GPs get continued support and the resources they need to ensure their protection, so we have the best possible frontline defence against this virus."