Australia's economic rescue package is a step in the right direction – but we needed a leap
The measures taken in response to the coronavirus crisis will support growth, but they will be slow to come into effect and aren't enough
Follow our Australian live blogFollow our global coronavirus live blogWhat the $189bn economic rescue package means for youWhy Australia is easing superannuation access for those worst-hit
The measures taken in response to the coronavirus crisis will support growth, but they will be slow to come into effect and aren't enough
Follow our Australian live blogFollow our global coronavirus live blogWhat the $189bn economic rescue package means for youWhy Australia is easing superannuation access for those worst-hit
The $66bn second stage of the government's economic policy response to the coronavirus crisis is a genuine effort to underpin the economy as it lurches towards the deepest economic downturn since the 1930s great depression.
Unfortunately for those losing their jobs, their hours of work and their businesses, there is an unseemly delay before most of the measures reach the bank accounts of those in need.
Because of this delay, there is a risk of a deeper decline in the economy than need be.
Even so, the measures will in time help to get money flowing into the economy through the small and medium-business sector, and to households. To that extent they provide an important injection of cash to the parts of the economy under severe stress.
Unlike the first package, which was targeted to have its greatest impact in the final quarter of 2019-20, the second package focuses more on 2020-21.
According to research by Cherelle Murphy, senior economist at ANZ Bank, the additional fiscal measures in the second stage package will see $14.4bn flow in the remainder of 2019-20, with a $29.5bn impact in 2020-21, before tailing off to $6bn in 2021-22.
There is little doubt that more will be needed, such is the economic catastrophe unfolding in Australia and around the world.
The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has acknowledged this. The government has more stimulus measures on the table, which are ready to be implemented as events unfold.
At one level, any policy initiative that injects cash into the economy is positive. The critical issue is to underpin remaining economic activity so that the recession is less severe than need be.
The payment of up to $100,000 for eligible small and medium-sized businesses and not for-profit entities that employ people, with a minimum payment of $20,000, will keep many of these businesses afloat through the recession. That means the recovery, when it comes, will start from a stronger footing. These cash injections will also help business to retain at least some staff and hence contain some of the surge in unemployment through the coming months.
The instant asset write-off for business investment is a necessary policy, but is likely to have a limited effect because businesses do not have the cash to invest in assets, nor the inclination to do so given the parlous outlook for the economy.
The government will also allow individuals whose income is affected by coronavirus to access up to $10,000 of their superannuation savings in each of 2019-20 and 2020-21.
This will free up cash for those who choose to access the scheme, but there are several important consequences.
As superannuation funds receive requests for such payments, they will need to liquidate assets to release the cash needed to fund the withdrawals. With the ASX200 already dropping over 30% in the past five weeks, this selling risks crystallising losses for superannuants.
Further, the selling will occur in a weak and skittish market. Unless global stock markets stabilise in coming weeks, the requisite selling of shares could compound the volatility on the local market and add to the panicked trading seen in recent weeks.
Another consequence is to undermine a key part of the superannuation system by reducing accumulated savings by up to $20,000 for those using the drawdown. This is especially the case given those who are eligible for the scheme – being made redundant, having your hours cut by more than 20% or as a sole trader having your turnover reduced by more than 20% – are likely to have moderate or low balances in their superannuation funds.
The sum of the economic measures announced to date will support growth, but they will be slow to affect the economy and they are not big enough.
More will be needed.
The government needs to be given some credit for dropping its "back in black" messaging about the budget, but there still seems to be some reluctance to do whatever it takes to stop the bleeding in the economy.
The recent stimulus is a step in the right direction, but we should already be three or four steps down the economic rescue path.