Morrison government urged to help temporary visa holders 'trapped' in Australia
Labor calls on the Coalition to extend visa deadlines and relax conditions while coronavirus restrictions are in place
Labor is calling on the government to extend visa deadlines and relax conditions for "trapped" temporary visa holders in Australia thrown into chaos by global travel bans and border closures.
As the government flagged it could soon tweak requirements for seasonal workers and backpackers already in the country to allow them to continue working, the shadow home affairs minister, Kristina Keneally, said the opposition would support "sensible, temporary and reviewable" measures for temporary visa holders.
In a letter sent to the immigration minister, Alan Tudge, on Friday, Keneally said the government needed to consider extending access to health treatment and social security support for more than 1 million visa holders currently in the country for the sake of the nation's health.
These include seasonal workers or those from our Pacific neighbours working in Australia, backpackers, international students, temporary protection visa holders, some skilled visas, and people on bridging visas.
"Labor … urges the government to ensure that all temporary visa holders can access coronavirus testing and treatment on a doctor's recommendation, and where necessary, some form of income support," Keneally says.
"At a time of national health crisis, a large population of temporary visa holders poses new and difficult challenges to community safety, social cohesion and the Australian sense of the fair go."
Echoing concerns of the Migration Council of Australia, Keneally also raised the issue of vulnerable temporary visa holders losing their jobs and being unable to return home or access benefits.
"As a result of national border lockdowns and the termination of international flights across the globe, within days many temporary visa holders will not be able to travel back to their home country easily or any time soon," she said.
"Others will lack the financial means to do so right now. Many temporary migrant workers will be, in effect, trapped in Australia during the coronavirus crisis without access to health care or a means of support."
Agriculture groups have also warned that the Covid-19 ban on foreign nationals entering Australia could leave farms without a workforce to harvest crops.
But the federal government has indicated it may be close to announcing visa extensions for seasonal workers and backpackers already in the country, so that they can keep working.
"We've got to understand there's over 140,000 backpackers in the country at the moment, and over 7,000 Pacific Island workers with their visas," the agriculture minister, David Littleproud, told the ABC.
"There is a workforce that is here and it's about making sure that we continue to provide continuity to our producers."
The agriculture sector says it is working to forecast how many people it will need to pick crops and take on other jobs once the foreign workers it relies on are blocked by a border closure from Friday night.
"We will get all of our crops harvested one way or another," Richard Shannon of horticultural body Growcom said on Friday.
Farmers have already experienced significant hardship in the face of a long-running drought and summer bushfires. A prolonged labour shortage would be a further, potentially ruinous, setback, Tyson Cattle, from industry group AusVeg, said.
"Australians need fresh produce and growers need workers to supply this produce to consumers.
"The extension of Seasonal Worker Program and Working Holiday Maker visas is a much-needed short-term solution to what will become a larger problem as the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic continues to limit the number of foreign workers who can come to Australia."
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries employees make up 2.5% of Australia's workforce.
But seasonal workers from Pacific nations are also needed for fruit and vegetable picking.
Their home countries had previously prohibited their citizens from leaving amid the coronavirus pandemic, fearing the virus might be brought back to small islands, even before Australia said it would be closing its borders to foreigners.
The labour gap could also be an opportunity for Australian workers laid off or temporarily stood down from their jobs due to Covid-19 crisis.
"A majority of labour is unskilled so anyone can perform those roles," Shannon said.
"Is a flight steward able to? Absolutely, as is a barista, as is a student.
"It's work outside and it's rewarding."
With Australian Associated Press