Morrison flags coronavirus hotspot lockdowns and domestic travel restrictions
Australia's PM says workplaces, bars, pubs, clubs and restaurants will need to provide four square metres of space per person
Scott Morrison has told Australians that life will continue to change as the Covid-19 virus disrupts society, after national cabinet signed off on new restrictions for internal gatherings and remote communities, financial help for the aged care sector, and an order for Australians to reconsider all "unnecessary travel".
As the number of confirmed cases of the virus spiked on Friday – with 75 more people diagnosed in New South Wales to bring the national total to 757 – the prime minister also flagged the potential for targeted lockdowns of virus hotspots, and domestic travel restrictions aimed at slowing the spread of the virus.
The new measures came as the NSW government scrambled to track down almost 3,000 people who were on the Ruby Princess cruise ship that disembarked in Sydney on Thursday, and has since been identified as having passengers on board carrying the disease.
With the virus continuing to spread, the ongoing economic uncertainty sparked by the pandemic has also prompted the government to announce that the federal budget will be delayed from May until October, with the states expected to follow suit.
"The idea that you can actually put together any sort of forecast around the economy at this time is simply not sensible," Morrison said.
The government is preparing to announce a second economic "survival" package on Sunday aimed at providing a safety net for individuals and businesses affected by the economic downturn. Morrison on Friday refused to rule out that the package might allow some workers to access their superannuation savings before retirement age.
Friday's meeting of state and territory leaders agreed to further consider travel restrictions before the Easter school holidays, and to look at potential hardship rental relief for both commercial and residential tenants.
"There will be further discussion about travel issues before the holidays … the advice is to reconsider the need for unnecessary travel."
More work has also been commissioned to look at potential restrictions on "particular areas" of outbreak, which could be faced with lockdowns in an attempt to slow its spread.
"What we've asked for advice on is the density of those cases, how many cases in a particular area, that triggers actions over and above what these general rules that apply to those areas," Morrison said.
"That would be staged up according to the level of that outbreak and what needs to be done wherever possible to shut that down."
After bans on mass gatherings of more than 500 people outdoors and 100 people indoors, new limits have also been agreed for smaller indoor gatherings of fewer than 100 people.
Under the restrictions, venues will only be able to accommodate one person for every four square metres of floor space, in a move that will have consequences for workplaces, bars, pubs, clubs and restaurants, as well as community and religious groups.
Morrison said while he understood the measure would mean "a lot of change" for venues and patrons, it was aimed at helping protect society's most vulnerable people.
"If you are looking after your behaviour, you are saving lives, you are helping other people who are more vulnerable," he said.
"By you doing the right thing, you will be saving the life of someone who is more vulnerable, so do it for your fellow Australians."
States and territories also agreed to nominate remote Indigenous areas to be proscribed under the Biosecurity Act, which will restrict persons from entering or leaving.
The $444m aged care funding boost, which is on top of $100m for workforce support announced last week, comprises $234.9m for a Covid-19 "retention bonus" to ensure the continuity of the workforce, $78m for workforce supply funding and $27m to supplement the viability of some residential aged care facilities.
Almost $100m is being provided to home care and home support providers and an extra $12.3m to support the My Aged Care service.
The national cabinet of state and territory leaders also received a briefing from the Reserve Bank governor, Philip Lowe, and the Treasury secretary, Steven Kennedy, about measures taken by the banks and the government over the past 48 hours aimed at helping businesses stay afloat and some economic stimulus.
The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said a decision by the banks to defer payments by small businesses for six months would be a substantial boost to confidence for "millions of Australian small businesses".
"It's a game-changer, and it's part of our efforts, with industry, with the states, to build a bridge to the recovery, to the time after the global pandemic of the coronavirus has hit," Frydenberg said.
Morrison said the country should prepare for further spread of the virus, and for more changes to society over the next six months: "Life is continuing to change, and together, we are going to have to continue to adapt to those changes.
"There is a way through this. We all need to keep going. I need all of you to keep going.
"And if we continue to work together in the way we are, all around the country, then Australia will bounce back strongly."