Australians with disabilities missing out on essential services as Covid-19 crisis escalates
"If you need to use public transport (e.g. taxis, ride-hail services, trains, buses and trams), follow the precautions outlined in the public transport guide.
"To minimise the spread of any germs you should regularly wash surfaces that are frequently touched such as door handles, light switches, kitchen and bathroom areas. Clean with household detergent or disinfectant.
"If you need to use public transport (e.g. taxis, ride-hail services, trains, buses and trams), follow the precautions outlined in the public transport guide.
"To minimise the spread of any germs you should regularly wash surfaces that are frequently touched such as door handles, light switches, kitchen and bathroom areas. Clean with household detergent or disinfectant.
Survey reveals that 82% of families haven't been able to buy supplies they need amid coronavirus outbreak
People with disabilities have had their national disability insurance scheme and other support services cancelled and been unable to get essential medication and supplies during the coronavirus outbreak, according to a survey by peak bodies in the sector.
A survey of 200 families conducted by Children and Young People with Disability Australia and the Australian Coalition for Inclusive Education also reveals concern about a lack of clear official advice for people with disabilities during the crisis.
Of the families with children and young people with disabilities surveyed, 82% of had not been able to buy essential supplies, 34% had NDIS or other support services cancelled and 15% were unable to buy the medication they needed.
An overwhelming majority (86%) said they were not receiving the information they needed to "keep children or young people with disability safe during the crisis".
Mary Sayers, the chief executive of Children and Young People with Disability Australia, told Guardian Australia the government's urgent priority should be ensuring an adequate supply of essential medicines and other supplies for children with disabilities, as well as personal protective equipment for carers.
She said disability service organisations were facing "enormous trouble with workers not turning up" and that parents and children were having support services cancelled at short notice.
One parent had told the survey their six-year-old child had lost 3kg during the crisis after a hospital appointment was cancelled.
Respondents to the survey said they were frustrated by mixed messages from education systems across the country about how social distancing would affect student support services.
Parents of children with disabilities were unsure whether to send their kids to school, where they may continue to share drinking taps and play closely with other children, she said.
Sue Tape's daughter Eliza has Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a physical and intellectual disability that also means "respiratory bugs can really knock her about".
Tape said there had been a "distinct lack" of clear information and advice.
"We've decided to self-isolate both our kids at home this week as a pre-emptive measure because there haven't been some hard decisions made by other people," she said.
"I can't see any planning beyond the decisions we are personally making. By rights, both my kids could still be at school, I could still be getting on public transport and going to work."
"If you need to use public transport (e.g. taxis, ride-hail services, trains, buses and trams), follow the precautions outlined in the public transport guide.
"To minimise the spread of any germs you should regularly wash surfaces that are frequently touched such as door handles, light switches, kitchen and bathroom areas. Clean with household detergent or disinfectant.
"In the absence of information, we have to make these decisions. That is very stressful. And there are other families that don't get to make that decision because they have to go to work."
The NDIS minister, Stuart Robert, said the government had plans in place to support NDIS participants, providers and the NDIA and "to ensure continuation of services in the case of an escalation in the incidence of Covid-19".
"NDIS participants, families, carers and providers will be given clear direction if services are disrupted in any way, ensuring they have options to continue accessing supports," he said.
Robert said he would meet NDIS stakeholders over the coming days "in preparation of escalation of incidence of Covid-19".
"I am working closely with my cabinet colleagues, departments and agencies to support a coordinated approach to delivering essential services such as the NDIS to the community."
A group of disability researchers from the universities of Melbourne, Sydney and New South Wales on Friday released a series of recommendations for the government to develop a specific response for people with disabilities during the coronavirus outbreak.
It included a call to rapidly increase the healthcare sector's capacity to care for people with disabilities and the disability care workforce so services would remain open for those who need them.
The Disability Reform Council, which oversees the NDIS, will meet on Wednesday.