Australian leaders consider ban on groups of more than 100 to try to halt coronavirus
The national cabinet will discuss the proposal, understood to have been raised on Sunday, in Tuesday's conference
Australia's newly minted national cabinet will consider banning groups of more than 100 people in enclosed areas when it meets on Tuesday, as it responds to the rapidly escalating spread of the coronavirus.
The proposal, which was first flagged with state and territory leaders on Sunday, comes as the federal government prepares to unveil a second stimulus package as early as this week amid warnings of an "exponential" rise in the number of infections.
Government modelling shows that with quarantine and isolation measures in place, Australia could see between 40,000 and 80,000 cases a day by August, with estimates as high as 300,000 cases a day by July if the disease is allowed to spread "unmitigated".
The potential further restrictions on smaller group gatherings indoors comes after the national cabinet of federal and state leaders agreed on Sunday to a ban on events of more than 500 people, sparking the widespread cancellation of functions across the country.
On Monday, presiding officers of the Australian parliament announced changes to next week's planned parliamentary sitting session, with visitors to be banned from the public galleries, and MPs and senators asked to restrict staff travelling to Canberra.
The government is also actively considering other ways to minimise risks of transmission in the upcoming parliamentary sittings, with any further restrictions expected to be negotiated between the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese.
Along with a consideration of a ban on groups of more than 100 people, the national cabinet will canvass further measures to protect those in aged care, along with the likely cancellation of Anzac day commemorations, which have already been cancelled in NSW, WA and Tasmania.
The cabinet will meet via video conference on Tuesday night.
Guardian Australia understands that state and territory leaders discussed the possibility of banning groups of more than 100 people indoors with the chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, on Sunday. Some concern is understood to have been expressed that the lower threshold for enclosed spaces would put pressure on states and territories to close education facilities and many workplaces.
Leaders were told, however, that the prospect would be discussed by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee at a meeting on Tuesday, which would then make its recommendation to the cabinet for consideration.
According to sources present at the meeting, leaders were advised that there was a "strong possibility" that the ban on smaller groups would be the next step required to help slow the spread of the virus outbreak, which has now infected 298 people and claimed five lives in Australia.
The expanded ban would not mean the closure of schools, but large hospitality venues, restaurants and bars would all be affected.
On Monday, Morrison said Tuesday's meeting of the national cabinet would consider the further advice on enclosed gatherings, along with measures targeting the aged care sector and remote Indigenous communities.
"The priority we gave the medical experts yesterday was to give us further advice on the arrangements we have around aged care facilities and about enclosed gatherings," Morrison told the ABC.
"What we need to do is slow the spread so we can protect the more vulnerable in the community who are at a much greater risk. So if we slow that spread, we are going to save more lives."
The likely new measures come amid fears that the health crisis will cause a severe global recession that has already seen the government announce a $17.6bn stimulus package to help prop up the domestic economy.
The forecast downturn prompted the Reserve Bank of Australia on Monday to flag that it will consider the emergency measure of quantitative easing – a process that would see the central bank purchase government bonds to try to boost the economy.
Another government stimulus package is now under development, with the Coalition to consider further help to affected businesses and households as it attempts to stave off a recession.
The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, conceded on Monday that job losses were already occurring, with particular concern in the tourism, aviation and trade-exposed industries.
"There is no doubt that job losses are occurring already and, sadly, will continue to occur. That's a consequence, of course, of the loss of custom and business," Birmingham said.
Albanese said the second stimulus package was an early concession that the first wave was "inadequate".
He also criticised the government's health response, saying more needed to be done to err on the side of caution.
"We need to look at where best practice has occurred and where the outcomes have been better than others, such as South Korea, for example, that has rolled out a massive testing of the population. That seems to have been effective in containing the virus more so than other countries," Albanese told the ABC.
He called for a national roll-out of drive-through testing, which has begun in South Australia, and the urgent roll-out of pop-up clinics.
The opposition's shadow minister for ageing, Julie Collins, called on the government to urgently boost assistance to the aged care sector, saying a plan for the highly casualised workforce was needed.
"It is critical to the health of older Australians that aged care workers do not face a financial penalty for doing the right thing and staying at home," she said.
"The government must do everything it can to improve our chances of containing this virus and flatten the curve in the weeks and months ahead."
The aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, announced some restrictions on Monday based on advice from the Communicable Disease Network of Australia, which has recommended that family and friends limit visits to residential care centres, particularly for residents already suffering from chronic illness.
"Given the risks to older Australians from Covid-19, particularly those with chronic disease and other frailties, we now recommend that residential aged care providers restrict visitor access," Colbeck said.