Australian state governments declare public health emergencies to contain coronavirus
Leaders outline penalties for people who fail to self-isolate or cancel mass gatherings
Scott Morrison has moved to clarify new self-isolation requirements on international arrivals to stop the spread of coronavirus as state and territory governments declare public health emergencies to enact controls and penalties on people who fail to self-isolate or cancel mass gatherings.
The prime minister and the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, have also flagged possible further restrictions on access to aged care centres and enclosed gatherings, with meetings of chief health officers on Monday and the national cabinet on Tuesday set to decide whether to further escalate Australia's response.
On Sunday the national cabinet decided that all international arrivals will have to self-isolate for a period of 14 days or face penalties including fines. Social distancing is now recommended for others, such as refusing handshakes and maintain a gap of 1.5 metres from other people.
In a round of interviews spruiking the new measures on Monday, Morrison clarified that the families of people arriving from overseas would not be required to self-isolate because they were a "low-risk" group.
On Monday Andrews declared a public emergency in Victoria and, in the Australian Capital Territory, where the second case of Covid-19 was confirmed, the chief minister, Andrew Barr, announced the ACT would declare a public health emergency later in the morning.
Andrews told reporters in Melbourne that the Victorian declaration would last for four weeks but would probably be extended, and announced it was now an offence under the Public Health and Wellbeing Act to fail to comply with self-isolation orders.
"Those orders relate to the mandatory … home quarantine or at a hotel if you are not a resident," he said. "That is a proportionate and appropriate response."
Andrews said he did not anticipate having to fine people for failure to cancel mass gatherings of 500 people or more because "to this point, people have been cooperative".
He said chief medical officers "are meeting today, tomorrow and throughout the week to provide further specific advice about specific settings like aged care and smaller gatherings".
"If you need to use public transport (e.g. taxis, ride-hail services, trains, buses and trams), follow the precautions outlined in the public transport guide.
"To minimise the spread of any germs you should regularly wash surfaces that are frequently touched such as door handles, light switches, kitchen and bathroom areas. Clean with household detergent or disinfectant.
New South Wales has already issued an order under the Public Health Act to force the immediate cancellation of major events with more than 500 people. Individuals who fail to comply could face up to six months in prison or a fine of up to $11,000, or both.
The Queensland health minister, Steven Miles, confirmed on Radio National that new laws passed in February would allow the state to impose compulsory self-isolation on people arriving from overseas, with penalties to include detention and fines if they failed to comply.
In an address to the nation on Sunday evening, the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, offered the government "a spirit of bipartisanship" and promised to be "constructive" in response.
But Albanese continued to push the government to go further in providing "more consistent advice" on when to self-isolate and get tested, to fast-track new fever clinics planned under the $2.4bn health response, and to provide more support for casual workers and independent contractors to take leave. "There is now no room for delays," he said.
On Monday, Morrison defended his government's speed in responding to coronavirus, after Guardian Australia revealed it did not commission a national public health campaign until 3 March, just a week before the $30m campaign was announced and more than a month after Australia's first case was confirmed on 25 January.
Morrison told ABC AM that resources had been set aside for the campaign "several weeks ago" and the government had taken coronavirus seriously since mid-January, responding with travel bans and evacuations from Wuhan and Japan.
Explaining the new requirement for international arrivals, Morrison said people would be issued with personal protective equipment to wear on their journey home, where they would need to self-isolate for 14 days. But their families would not need to self-isolate because they were a "low risk group", he said.
Morrison praised Woolworths for instituting a dedicated hour of shopping for vulnerable groups, namely elderly people and those with disabilities. He blamed panic buying on "misinformation on social media" and people "listening to opinions on their health" sourced from Twitter rather than the chief medical officers.
On Sky, Morrison flagged the next stage of restrictions would probably include controls on visiting aged care centres and gatherings in enclosed spaces.
"When you have elderly relatives in nursing homes you obviously want to see them – it might be the last time you get to see them," he said. "That needs to be done sensitively ... We need to lessen the broader risk for people in these facilities."
Morrison confirmed that the widespread closure of schools was not recommended, although "specific instances" of outbreaks in specific schools had attracted closures in NSW and Victoria.
Morrison confirmed he has not been tested for coronavirus, citing the fact he does not have symptoms.
After the announcement on Thursday of a $17.6bn stimulus package to counteract the economic impact of coronavirus, there are signs that further government assistance will be required for affected industries.
On Sunday Labor's shadow infrastructure minister, Catherine King, called for assistance to address the "significant consequences" for the aviation sector caused by travel bans and self-isolation requirements.
Asked about possible government support for the major carriers Qantas and Virgin, the foreign minister, Marise Payne, told Radio National: "Yes … as this progresses, I'm sure there will be other matters which need to be considered, maybe the ones you have raised."
Payne also noted that major sporting events including the Australian Football League, National Rugby League and racing have been disrupted and the government "will be asked to consider those".