Coronavirus Australia latest: 12 June at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, this is Lisa Cox and here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is the final Coronavirus at a glance daily summary. From next week we'll publish Coronavirus at a glance as a regular weekly summary, which you can also receive as an email. If weekly updates aren't enough, there are plenty of other great Guardian Australia emails to sign up to featured below.
The national cabinet met on Friday and reconfirmed its commitment to the 3-step framework for easing of restrictions. The cabinet agreed to further changes, based on Australian Health Protection Principal Committee advice, including to lift the 100 person limit on gatherings in step three of the plan that most states and territories are due to move to next month. That will be replaced by the one person per four square metre rule. Stadiums that can seat up to 40,000 people will be able to have crowds of up to 10,000.
The national cabinet also reiterated the AHPPC advice that protests are high risk due to large numbers of people gathering closely and and the challenges in identifying all contacts.
The prime minister, Scott Morrison, confirmed plans were being considered for the safe return of international students "in a very controlled setting". Universities Australia's chief executive, Catriona Jackson, said the safety and welfare of the community was paramount and that Australia's success in limiting the spread of Covid-19 wasn't jeopardised.
"Universities Australia has been talking to the federal government about an overarching framework for a safe return for some time. It is good to see progress today with specific pilot proposals under consideration," she said.
The prime minister, Scott Morrison, confirmed the national strategy on Covid-19 was to pursue suppression of the virus.
"If we are able to achieve elimination or eradication as a byproduct then that's well and good, but we ... are not going to have our policies trapped by the goal of eradication," he said.
The South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, has set a date for reopening of the state's borders: 20 July. Queensland's health minister, Steven Miles, reiterated the state is aiming for 10 July.
Rose Bay Public School in Sydney's eastern suburbs was closed on Friday due to a staff member with a likely case of Covid-19. NSW Health later it was a positive case after an expert panel reviewed the test results. However, it is unclear when the person was infected and could be an older case, the department said. Contact tracing is under way.
The WA government will rename the King Leopold Ranges in the state's Kimberley region, the ABC reported. The King Leopold Ranges are named after the former king of Belgium - King Leopold II - whose atrocities and violent reign of the Congo Free State led to up to 10 million deaths. He has no connection to WA and never visited.
The WA Land Minister Ben Wyatt told the ABC King Leopold II was an evil tyrant who should not be honoured in WA.
From next week, this email will be sent once a week – on Friday afternoon – instead of every weekday.