Black Lives Matter: health experts assess risks of Covid-19 transmission at Australia protests
Protests have been called 'dangerous' by chief medical officer, but research shows racism can be as deadly as coronavirus
The advice on protests from Australia's Health Protection Principal Committee – the group of experts that advises governments during national emergencies – has been clear. People should not attend mass gatherings of any kind, because even though rates of community transmission of Covid-19 are low and many states are not reporting any new cases for days in a row, there is still a risk the virus may spread.
"Australians are reminded that in our recent past a single person infected more than 35 others," the committee's advice states. "This virus is very, very infectious. It will be with us in one way or another for many months to come."
But as Australia has made commendable efforts to contain Covid-19, the social and public health consequences of racism have been brought to the fore by the Black Lives Matter movement. Protests are being held throughout the world following the brutal death of unarmed man George Floyd in the US on 25 May after a police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes, ignoring Floyd's protests of "I can't breathe". Australian protesters took to the streets in solidarity on Saturday, campaigning for an end to Aboriginal deaths in custody. There have been 437 known Aboriginal deaths since the royal commission into Aboriginal deaths in custody delivered its final report in 1991, and yet despite this, change has been slow.
It is clear that protests will go ahead despite the health advice about Covid-19, with more protests planned in New South Wales and Western Australia for Friday night. A Victorian man who attended the weekend protest in Melbourne was later diagnosed with the virus, with health authorities saying he was likely infected before the rally. But with community transmission in Australia so low, and the prime minister saying Australia's goal is "suppression" and not "elimination" of the virus, and that major sports stadiums may allow 10,000 people by July, just how risky are the protests?
Australia's chief medical officer, Prof Brendan Murphy, said on Friday, "These sort of events really are dangerous." But he also said the country has "effectively achieved elimination". The issue is there may still be pockets where community transmission is occurring, he said. While widespread testing, especially in Victoria, might help to identify those areas, it is unlikely that all cases have been identified.
A professor of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health at Western Sydney University, Aunty Kerrie Doyle, said she personally would not attend protests as she and her husband are at higher risk of complications if they get the virus.
"But I support people who are going and I appreciate people standing up for our mob," she said. "Community infections are almost non-existent, really. Meanwhile, there's not a day when Indigenous people aren't targeted. The police know who we are."
She said NSW Aboriginal man David Dungay said "I can't breathe" 12 times before he died while being restrained by five guards in a Sydney jail. "Finally there is a groundswell of people who have come to understand how serious this issue is," Doyle said.
Prof Mary-Louise McLaws, a member of the World Health Organisation advisory panel for infection prevention and control, said, "You need to balance perceived risk with real risk and infection control. I think there is always a risk when people gather but the community and myself are confused given it's OK to go to a crowded airport and sit on a plane for at least 40 minutes without a mask, and you can go to crowded shopping mall or to a supermarket, or be surrounded by people talking at a restaurant."
She said the risk at rallies would depend on crowd behaviour. "At a rally, people without a mask will increase risks as we know particles can be pushed out at great velocity, especially if you're shouting. But if the protesters wear a mask and they keep that integrity of the mask during the rally intact, and they stay home if they feel unwell, then the risk is very minimal to negligible."
The chief executive of the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation, Pat Turner, said it was important for protesters to remember that Covid-19 poses a serious risk to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people due to higher levels of chronic conditions in that population, especially in those aged 50 years and older.
"The specific advice of all health authorities is that while Covid-19 remains in Australia that everyone should take precautions including the social distancing and hygiene practices," she said.
"Those who attended the rally should take every precaution they can in terms of practical measures to protect themselves and their families. It is important you continue with social distancing, regular hand washing and cough hygiene. If you can, avoid contact with Elders and with people with chronic medical conditions ... If you develop even the mildest of symptoms, stay home and get a Covid-19 test."
The government's health advice is that people who march in protests don't need to isolate unless they feel sick, in which case they should get tested.
"Racism makes you sick," Doyle said. "I think one of the greatest impacts I see is a reluctance among our people to approach others for help. They have internalised that they are a second class and lower class citizen, and that they don't deserve medical treatment and if they seek it out, doctors won't listen. If the rest of Australia thinks you're rubbish, you will believe that eventually."
She referred to a report that came out one decade ago from the Cooperative Research Centre for Aboriginal Health and Flinders University which found "compared to non-Indigenous patients with the same medical needs, Indigenous patients were about one-third less likely to receive appropriate medical care across all conditions".
"After accounting for the effects of a range of other contributing factors, racism was significantly associated with poor self-assessed health status, psychological distress, diabetes, smoking and substance use … depression, poor self-assessed health status and poor mental health," the report said.
Doyle said that for so long Indigenous people and their supporters had tried various ways to raise these issues with government. Yet the disparity remained.
"We know there are protests going on tonight and we at our university are worried about our students and our Indigenous students who go and place themselves in clear and present danger for having their voices heard, but what's the other alternative?" she said. "What can you do when people like Pauline Hanson are out there saying people like Floyd deserve their treatment?"
The Public Health Association of Australia chief executive, Prof Terry Slevin, said the community often perceived events as "risky or not risky". The reality was often more complicated, he said. "It's important for us not to depict the protests this evening about being one public health imperative against another; Covid-19 versus advancing the health of Indigenous and Torres Strait islander people.
"The protests are not completely risk-free, but neither is going to the supermarket. It's very important for people with concerns about Black Lives Matter to have an opportunity to express that and do it as safely as they can. That means not taking a confrontational approach towards protesters but a co-operative approach that minimises risks."