Coronavirus Australia latest: 10 June at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Lisa Cox and it's Wednesday 10 June.
Jessica Mauboy, Jimmy Barnes, Tina Arena, Archie Roach and more than 1,000 artists, venues, festivals and music industry professionals signed an open letter calling for an immediate federal government rescue package for the struggling music sector.
The industry is calling for a suite of federal measures, including an extension of the jobkeeper program beyond September, and its expansion togig and contract workers who would otherwise not qualify; a $40m package for music industry recovery; a boost to Australia Council funding with $70m available across art forms; and tax reform for the live performance and recording sector.
Labor used the first sitting day of parliament for the month to question the government over its $60bn jobkeeper mistake and the robodebt scandal. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, asked the prime minister, Scott Morrison, to confirm that in just three weeks since parliament last sat the government had admitted it overestimated coverage of its jobkeeper scheme by 3 million workers, announced it would repay $720m to victims of its robodebt Centrelink debt recovery scheme and Australia entered its first recession in three decades. "It is a recession, Mr Speaker, there's no doubt about that," Morrison said. Morrison said the opposition was using the economic challenges created by the pandemic for political purposes.
Australian year 12 students will receive their university entry scores in the second half of December. Students and families have faced major challenges as a result of disruption the pandemic has caused to their final year of schooling. A meeting of education ministers from across the country decided the release of individual Australian Tertiary Admission Rank (Atar) results, for students completing year 12 in 2020, would occur "within a nationally consistent window of 15 December to 31 December 2020".
A legal challenge to the Queensland government's decision to keep the state's borders closed hit a snag. The high court in Brisbane refused an application from lawyers for the Travel Essence challenge to access the documents used by the government when it decided to close the border. The chief justice,Susan Kiefel,said the application was "a fishing expedition" and "subsidiary" to the constitutional matter at hand.
Four Labor senators who attended Black Lives Matter marches were being tested for Covid-19 as a precautionary measure. The Northern Territory senator Malarndirri McCarthy, Alice Springs-based MP Warren Snowdon and Queenslanders Graham Perrett and Anika Wells left parliament for tests on Wednesday and were isolating until they receive results. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said they were being tested "out of an abundance of caution".
Dozens of scientific papers co-authored by the chief executive of the US tech company behind the Lancet hydroxychloroquine study scandal are now being audited, including onethat ascientific integrity expertclaims contains images that appear to have been digitally manipulated. The audit follows a Guardian investigation that found the company,Surgisphere, used suspect data in major scientific studies that were published and then retracted by world-leading medical journals, including the Lancet and the New England Journal of Medicine. The Lancet study led to global hydroxychloroquine trials being halted because it appeared to show the drug increased deaths in Covid-19 patients.
From next week, this email will be sent once a week – on Friday afternoon – instead of every weekday.