Jobkeeper: Coalition hints at 'further adjustments' as Labor accuses it of breaking promise
Mathias Cormann describes $60bn discrepancy as an 'estimates variation' as PM warns of 'difficult decisions' looming
Mathias Cormann has indicated the government may make "further adjustments" to the $70bn jobkeeper program as Labor continues to target the Coalition for breaking a promise by withdrawing the wage subsidy from 120,000 childcare sector workers.
On Tuesday the finance minister fronted the Senate Covid-19 committee to explain the $60bn discrepancy in the projected cost of the program, which he described as an "estimates variation" and for which the Treasury secretary, Steven Kennedy, said he took "full responsibility".
With parliament set to resume on Wednesday, Scott Morrison addressed the Coalition party room to warn of "difficult decisions" looming as the government phases out economic supports in line with resumption of activity as Covid-19 restrictions ease.
Kennedy told the committee Treasury now estimates unemployment will be down to 8% by September, an improvement on forecasts suggesting a peak of 10% and year-end unemployment of 9%.
Kennedy said the recovery could "accelerate through the latter half of the year" but there will be "significant falls" in company and income tax, and employment growth tended to lack increased economic activity.
Kennedy said Treasury's initial $130bn estimate for the jobkeeper wage subsidy, announced on 30 March, was based on a lockdown period of eight weeks, then a return to earlier levels of economic restrictions imposed in March.
Improved health outcomes resulted in national cabinet phasing out restrictions from 8 May – "significantly earlier" than expected – and Australia avoided scenes of intensive care units "overwhelmed" with Covid-19 cases that would have caused "fear" and withdrawal from economic activity, he said.
The Australian Taxation Office's commissioner, Chris Jordan, told the committee that as businesses estimated their number of eligible employees the program "seemed to be on trajectory consistent with estimates" – and through April this was a "surprise" to the Treasury, Kennedy said.
The jobkeeper program required employers to first enrol by estimating their number of eligible employees, then to formally apply at a second stage with employees' tax file numbers.
The ATO noticed a growing discrepancy between jobkeeper payments and employee estimates, estimated to have reached 6.3m by 18 May. It sought feedback from large employers, which seemed to be the last to complete the second stage of enrolment.
A timetable, tabled at the committee, shows that on 20 May the ATO discovered there were 3.3m fewer employees of businesses with 500 or more workers actually registered in the program than was first thought.
Some 577 businesses had enrolled with an estimate of more than 500 employees, but in fact had registered for just one to four workers.
Jordan and the ATO second commissioner, Jeremy Hirschhorn, said the error "temporarily obscured size of demand driven program".
The source of the error was identified on 21 May. Some 0.1% of businesses had filled in the enrolment confusing "the amount payable to rather than the number of employees", Jordan said, resulting in businesses claiming to have 1,500, 3,000 or more.
Hirschhorn said this resulted in 1,500 out of 1m businesses putting a "dramatically wrong number" when estimating their number of employees.
"We did not build rigorous analytics behind that field that asked for the estimated number of employees that businesses had [claimed for]," Jordan conceded.
Cormann said the discovery of the discrepancy triggered a fresh estimate of the cost of the program at a time that "the health and economic outlook was significantly better than in March".
Cormann insisted the $60bn "estimates variation" was therefore "not an accounting error as it has been falsely described by some" but rather the product of "substantially changed parameters".
The chair of the committee, Labor's Katy Gallagher, seized on the evidence, telling reporters after the hearing that employer errors were "a very small part of the massive revision" and accusing the government of trying to "blame business" for its own miscalculation.
Earlier, in the hearing, Gallagher probed a guarantee given by Scott Morrison on Friday that "the six months provision of jobkeeper has been set out in legislation and people can count on that".
Gallagher suggested the guarantee had immediately been breached by a decision to revoke jobkeeper from the childcare sector after fees are reintroduced from 13 July, ending the temporary free system.
"I don't agree that's what [Morrison has] done," Cormann said.
Cormann argued the jobkeeper program will remain "in place to the end of September" but "in relation to childcare workers" it was replaced with a $708m transition payment and return to the usual subsidy model, which was more "fair and equitable".
Kennedy revealed that 120,000 childcare workers currently receive the $1,500 fortnightly payment and are set to lose it from 20 July.
On Monday, the education minister, Dan Tehan, conceded the transition payment is likely to be less than jobkeeper but argued it was more fairly spread across the sector.
On Tuesday Tehan defended Morrison by telling ABC News Breakfast the prime minister "was talking about the legislation that is there, which guarantees that the jobkeeper package will be there for six months".
In a round of morning interviews, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, did not rule out further changes to phase out the payment before September.
Under consideration in the Treasury review are options including removing the payment from certain industries – so that only the hardest hit sectors such as tourism retain it – or requiring businesses to show they have the required 30% downturn in revenue each and every month not just the first qualifying month.
Cormann told the committee he was "not aware of any other sectors in scope" for removal of jobkeeper, but the government is yet to receive the review, due by the end of June. There "may well be some further adjustments made at the edges", he said.
Cormann counterattacked by noting Labor had suggested jobkeeper should be reduced for workers who normally earn less than $1,500 a fortnight who had their pay increased by the subsidy.