State-funded airlines gain in global market after Qantas, Virgin Australia halt international flights
Some foreign carriers likely operating at a loss to maintain routes to Australia and 'hook' passengers, transport expert says
Qantas and Virgin Australia have halted international commercial flights after government funding for select overseas routes ended, allowing some state-funded competitors to close in on the global market.
The Australian government has subsidised Qantas and Virgin Australia flights from London, Auckland, Los Angeles and Hong Kong over the past few months, to repatriate Australians stranded by coronavirus. The flights were on a cost-recovery basis, with passenger revenue remitted to the government.
Qantas and Virgin's international fleets have otherwise been largely grounded since stringent border restrictions came into place on 25 March, banning Australians from leaving the country without an exemption.
Qantas's last scheduled flight from LA landed in Australia on Monday morning, while Virgin Australia's landed in Brisbane on Tuesday.
In their absence from the marketplace, state-owned airlines such as Qatar and the indirectly government-owned Singapore Airlines have continued to run regular international flights, even though they are likely operate at a loss, according to Prof Rico Merkert, a researcher in transport and supply chain management at the University of Sydney.
"They want to grab market share, increase presence and improve branding," he told Guardian Australia. "Airlines spend an enormous amount of money in non-Covid times to maintain clients. What Qatar is trying to do is grab those passengers now and try and hook them.
"So for a carrier such as Qantas, that has to operate on a commercially viable basis, this is not a level playing field and it is very hard to compete."
Qatar has seven return flights a week to Doha from Sydney alone, while Singapore Airlines has five to Singapore.
Alicia Wanstall-Burke flew with Qatar Airways from Manchester to Brisbane via Doha last week.
"The first flight was eerie – there were maybe a handful in business, then the entire middle section of the plane was empty," she said. "We were in the rear section, and it would have been lucky to be a third full. I had an empty row in the front and behind me, as well as to my right.
"All staff wore hazmat-style suits, gloves, masks and goggles for the entire flight."
Her flight from Doha to Brisbane was "more crowded", but passengers were evenly distributed and there were seats between those not travelling together.
Wendy Rowe, who flew from Doha to Melbourne, landing on 4 June, said she was told her Qatar Airways flight had only 100 people on it. Groups not travelling together were separated by the aisle, or a spare seat.
United Airlines is also operating a daily flight between San Francisco and Sydney, but a company spokesperson said business was still in a deep trough.
"While there are glimmers of good news in our July schedule – we expect to be down about 75%, versus 90% right now – travel demand is still a very long way from where it was at the end of last year and the financial impact on our business remains severe."
One passenger, Elyssa, told the Guardian her United flight last week from Seattle to Sydney via San Francisco had no more than 50 people onboard.
Other carriers still operating to and from Australia include Air New Zealand, Cathay Pacific, Emirates and Etihad. China Southern, China Eastern, Xiamen Air, Garuda, China Airlines, Asiana Airlines and All Nippon Airways also have limited flights.
A Virgin Australia spokesperson said it was financially impossible for the company, which is currently in administration, to run international commercial flights for so few travellers without government support, but it was still in discussions to extend the subsidy. . Qantas said it might operate some further ad hoc international services if required.
Both airlines confirmed that they would continue to operate international cargo-only flights.