Coronavirus Australia latest: 8 June at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Justine Landis-Hanley and it's Monday 8 June.
New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern announced her government would abandon all coronavirus restrictions from midnight tonight, after health officials confirmed the recovery of the country's last known Covid-19 case.
There are no active cases of Covid-19 in the country for the first time since 28 February. New Zealand has recorded fewer than 1,500 cases of coronavirus, and 22 deaths.
Border restrictions will remain in place, meaning only New Zealanders and their families will be allowed to enter the country and must stay in government-run quarantine for a fortnight.
But Ardern said the fight was not over for New Zealand, warning they would "almost certainly see cases here again".
"That is not a sign that we have failed; it is the reality of this virus."
Ardern has quelled the idea of a possible travel bubble between New Zealand and Australia that would allow residents to travel between both countries without quarantining.
She said Australia would first need to be "in a similar position" to New Zealand, with no active Covid-19 cases.
"The reason that New Zealanders, as of tomorrow, will be able to move around with freedom that very few other countries in the world have is because we are maintaining those restrictions at the border."
The Morrison government announced it will roll back its free childcare scheme, introduced on 12 July at the height of the pandemic.
The education minister, Dan Tehan, said fees would be capped at what they were in February, and extra subsidies would be provided to eligible families whose employment has been affected by coronavirus.
Labor's childcare spokeswoman, Amanda Rishworth, has criticised the government's "snap back" change, saying that "this could well act as a handbrake on the economy".
"If women and families are not able to access affordable childcare, how are they going to get back to work? How are they going to actually participate in the economy?"
Despite Scott Morrison recently promising that jobkeeper would last until September, the government today announced the program would cease for the childcare sector from 20 July.
Instead, the government would pay childcare services a transition payment of 25% of their fee revenue until late September.
The number of known Covid-19 cases worldwide have passed 7 million and deaths have passed 400,000, according to John Hopkins University.
The US remains the worst-affected country, with over 1.9 million confirmed cases and more than a quarter of the world's total deaths, 110,503.
Meanwhile, Australia reported only five new cases overnight across NSW and Victoria: three returned travellers, an aged care facility resident, and another case "under investigation" by NSW Health.
Deputy chief medical officer Dr Nick Coatsworth has responded to those saying there is a double standard between protests being allowed despite spectator sport being prohibited, arguing there were "substantive differences" between a single protest and weekly footy matches.
Coatsworth also said those who attended protests over the weekend should not be treated differently than other people when it came to getting tested.
Meanwhile on Sunday, the minister for finance, Mathias Cormann, attacked protesters, saying in a Sky News interview that going to the march was "incredibly selfish" and "incredibly self-indulgent" given the health risk.