Sporting silence in the Covid-19 era – a photographer's view
The NRL is back and the AFL returns this week but sport has changed drastically since the outbreak. Here, Getty Images' chief photographer Ryan Pierse offers a unique perspective from behind the lens of the post-coronavirus world
It just wasn't right.Itwas aThursday nightinmid-March.A sterile renditionofYellow And Blackechoedaroundan empty Melbourne Cricket Groundand throughmy television speakers as I settledin to watch the opening match of the 2020 AFLpremiershipseason.
This now traditional season opener would normally draw a crowd of 80,000 sport loving Melburnians, hungry for the first blood of a new campaign.Not so this year. The Covid-19pandemic forced all sporting events in Australiato becancelled orheldbehindclosed doors to adhere to social distancing regulations.
Row upon row of seats in the MCG stands remain empty for the 2020 season opener between Richmond and Carlton
Listening to the players'voices reverberate off 100,000 empty plastic seatswas eerie and unnatural. It just wasn't right. It had to stop. At the end of that weekend it did. The NRL followed suit soon after and thenoise and energyof sport was muted.
Australians were, in a way, lucky thatsport continued even for that short period and provided a distraction from the pandemic-related headlines dominating minds. Most other countries had already suspended or cancelled their sporting events.But itbecame rapidly clear, despite various leagues' best intentions, this was not atime for sport.
An aerial view of an empty Sydney Cricket Ground on 22 April, 2020
For Australians, sport is more than a game. It's a religion. It'sanopportunity to become fiercely tribal for a few hours at the end of a tough week. It's vital to our psyche.As a sports photojournalist, I live and breathe sport. It'smy job, but I'm invested in itpersonally too.
It's controversial, but as someone who spends months on the road each year covering sporting assignments, I can honestly say I've enjoyed this slice ofsportingsilenceand the opportunityit has providedto reflect and miss it.This has been a time to reconnect with family.A time to really get to know your kids.A time to communicate in different ways with your closest friends. A time to dust off old hobbies and passions.A time tosobover a sillyshowonNetflix.Downtimeto stopandthink about what isreallyimportant.
Dylan Walker runs out onto the field during the round three NRL match between his Manly Sea Eagles and the Canterbury Bulldogs
While wewerenot quenching the public's thirst for live sport, we documenteda narrative of the Australian sporting landscape thatwe have never had the chance to see.Our Getty Images team hasspent the last fewmonthscapturinghow our sporting heroescopedwiththisdowntime.
Forathletes, their main job has been to remain in form and at peak fitness, both physically and mentally. They need to be ready whenever their sport is given the green light to resume. Even for thosewhoseOlympic dreams have been put on ice for another lap around the sun, theirsteelyfocus remains.With their usual training venues shut, many resortedto makeshift home setups to maintain their fitness.
Olympic canoeist Jess Fox trains at her home while in isolation
In the extreme case of Olympic canoe slalom athlete Jess Fox, she continuedto keep her golden hopes afloat by paddling up and down her small backyard pool in suburban western Sydney.
Olympic swimmer Bronte Campbell practises yoga on her terrace
Olympic swimmer Bronte Campbell enjoyedher new Bondi apartment with daily sunrise yoga and a fitness session on her rooftop, followed by Zoom exercise bike sessions with her swim team, including her sister Cate. Let me tell you, sibling rivalry still exists even over a bad iPhone connection!
L-R: swimmer Matt Wilson and GWS Giants player Tim Taranto
For some, lockdownhas beena chance to slow down.Someone who is always performing at an express pace, Australian cricket's golden boy Pat Cummins,shifted down a few gears and spent the entire period on his rural property in the Southern Highlands, south of Sydney. I spent a relaxing morning down there,photographing him doing a little bit of training but mostly hanging out with his fiance Becky, their dog Norman and six of their cows (didn't catch their names).
Australian fast bowler Pat Cummins, his fiance Becky Boston and their dog Norman ride on their farm buggy while in isolation at their property
Iwas luckyenoughto havetheopportunity, along with myGetty Imagescolleague and friend Cameron Spencer, to spend an afternoonat the peak of lockdownbuzzing high above Sydney in a helicopter.
We documented how theemeraldcity looksfrom above,minus the throngs of tourists, thegridlocked traffic andthe packed beaches.Hovering above the Sydney Cricket Ground as it was being well wateredgave me a reassuring calmnessand a sprinkle of hope that action on the famous turf may not be too far away.
As westart to imagine a world beyondisolation,it's important to note that sport was never truly silenced – neither for the athletes nor the Australians who cheer them on.For the health of sporting bodies, sponsors and most importantly the athletes themselves,the media mustcontinue toplay their part in keeping sport front of mind with the Australian publicduring the slowreturn to normalcy. We need to keep telling the stories that can inspire all Australians during these challenging times.
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.