Can Australia expect a spike in coronavirus cases over winter?
Community transmission is more likely during the colder months due to lower humidity, viruses surviving longer on hard surfaces and people huddling together indoors
As Australia enters winter – the season of woollen jumpers and runny noses – there is fresh concerns over the country's low level, yet persistent, community transmission of Covid-19.
Since the start of the pandemic, the virus and the cold have been closely linked in the public mind, with the majority of hard-hit countries experiencing the northern hemisphere winter. But was this merely a coincidence or could a drop in temperature lead to a spike in our cases?
Here we try to answer the most common questions relating to Covid-19 and colder weather.
Statistically speaking it's still too early to tell as there isn't a full year's worth of data on the disease, but considering the behaviour of most other respiratory illnesses, epidemiologists suggest it's likely.
"It's almost beyond doubt that respiratory viruses spread more readily in winter, and Covid is a respiratory virus at the end of the day," said Professor Peter Collignon, an infectious diseases expert at the Australian National University.
"It's spread predominantly by droplets, exactly the same way as influenza and the common cold viruses. I think it's likely that winter will have an effect."
A study published this week from the University of Sydney also found a 1% decrease in humidity could increase the number of Covid-19 cases by 6%.
"Covid-19 is likely to be a seasonal disease that recurs in periods of lower humidity. We need to be thinking if it's wintertime, it could be Covid-19 time," said Professor Michael Ward, who conducted the study.
"When the air is dry, particles and aerosols tend to be smaller, which means they can float in the air for longer," Ward said.
In the southern hemisphere, humidity is lower during winter.
This study was undertaken in partnership with Fudan University in Shanghai, where similar results were observed.
"In China, we also saw that decreases in temperature in their northern hemisphere winter also had an effect."
Ward said this is consistent with other coronavirus diseases such as Sars or Mers which have also shown to spread more easily in low-humidity climates.
"I would say this has a moderate effect. It's not the primary driving factor [of transmission]. Human behaviour is probably more important, but it's a factor."
The virus is also known to survive longer on hard surfaces at low temperatures, potentially making community transmission more likely during the colder months.
"We certainly saw that viral stability was enhanced in those conditions where the ambient temperature was lower," said Professor Benjamin Cowie, an infectious disease expert with Doherty Institute.
"That's why we get so many season flus and colds every winter, it is partly because they are stable and are more able to be transmitted."
While temperature and humidity may have a significant effect on the community transmission rates of viruses, there are a number of human behaviours in wintertime that also contribute to the seasonal rise in respiratory illnesses.
"People are indoors in crowded places with probably less than adequate ventilation because you're trying to preserve the heat. People huddle together when they are cold," Collignon said.
Indoor heating can also result in lower humidity.
"Being huddled around the heater, close to everyone, it's what you want to do, but a lot of the things we do that are very pleasant in winter give you an increased risk of transmitting viruses," he said.
Epidemiologists suggest that while Australia may see a moderate bump in cases, it's unlikely the cold will cause anything close to the numbers seen in Europe or the US.
"I think we'll get more cases but I don't think we will have uncontrollable spread. The reason being, we've got all these things in place already … We have to remember that we've got very low community transmission," Collignon said.
"I think [coronavirus] spreads more easily in winter, but it doesn't mean you can't control it. Look at Korea, look at Taiwan, look at Hong Kong … Australia was lucky because the major spread around the world was during our summer," Collignon said.
However, Ward noted that unlike Europe or the US, Australia is reopening during winter.
"It is coinciding with sort of potentially the worst time of the year," he said.
"You win on one side, lose on the other … So as long as the surveillance is good, and we catch things early, if we do start to get spikes or a second wave it can be shut down fairly quickly."
With a widely available vaccine potentially years away, the Australian government may have to prepare for more than one winter with community transmission of Covid-19 in the population.
Ward suggested adjusting restrictions based on the season.
"I know that message might be hard to get across, but if it is a disease with more cases in winter, maybe there should be stronger restrictions in those months. There certainly should be more surveillance of the disease, in winter," he said.
Cowie also suggested boosting the availability of sick leave to help combat seasonal spikes.
"Any suggestion of being unwell you stay at home and we don't soldier on. Even if we've got a slightly sore throat or a bit of a sniffle, feeling a bit of a headache or a fever," he said.
"We have to make sure that people are not only encouraged to stay home, but they are supported to do so. Things like providing sick leave for people who otherwise wouldn't be eligible, whether they're casual workers or otherwise.
"We are starting to let people mix again. We're going to see more colds and coughs and we're not going to know if those people have coronavirus or have just a normal cold or flu until they get tested, so we really need to be a lot more proactive about our approach to those who have the symptoms and how we screen them."
While lockdown laws may be easing, there are additional measures individuals can take as we enter the colder months.
"If everyone did everything they were meant to all the time then we wouldn't have to increase measures, but the reality is they don't," said Collignon.
"What can you do? Well, you can wash your hands more often, clean surfaces more often and keep your distance from everybody as much as possible. Even if they're close family, keep your distance as much as is practicable.
"If you are thinking of having 10 people over, maybe only have six. If they are coming over for dinner, maybe come for lunch and have it in the backyard in the sun. Everything you can do will help decrease spread."
Collignon said it was important in the coming months that Australians don't act like the threat of the virus is over.
"My worry is everybody says 'Oh look, there's not an issue anymore.' Well, I think there is still an issue … I do actually think we need to be concerned about winter."