Australian Medical Association accuses Covid infection control group chair of 'tone deaf' comments
Prof Lyn Gilbert says she hadn't blamed healthcare workers for 'anything' after AMA president accused her of disparaging comments about the use of PPE
The president of Australia's professional body for doctors has written to the chair of the government's coronavirus infection control advisory group, accusing it of being "tone deaf" to concerns over PPE guidelines.
Dr Omar Khorshid, president of the Australian Medical Association, issued an open letter to Prof Lyn Gilbert on Friday accusing her of disparaging healthcare workers, and demanding she retract comments made in an interview with the Australian that appeared to blame them for failing to follow infection control measures.
But Gilbert told Guardian Australia late Friday she had not blamed healthcare workers "for anything" and she defended the advice given by the Infection Control Expert Group (ICEG), which she chairs.
The ICEG expert group advises the government's Australian Health Protection Principal Committee on ways to control the coronavirus, including advice on use of PPE in hospitals and other health facilities.
The AMA has previously attacked ICEG over its advice on masks, saying the group should have recommended mandatory use of N95 face masks in care settings.
In Victoria, more than 3,500 healthcare workers caught the virus during the pandemic.
Korshid wrote he had been contacted by "many members" who were "extremely distressed" by comments from Gilbert, reported in the Australian.
He wrote: "Blaming the high rates of health care worker infections on apathy, while refusing to accept that there could be any issue with ICEG guidelines is fuelling growing concerns within the health professions that ICEG is simply seeking to defend its own advice at all costs."
Korshid accused ICEG of having a "continuing tone-deaf attitude towards the legitimate concerns that have been consistently raised over its Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) guidelines."
"There is growing resentment towards ICEG's work and a lack of confidence in its recommendations," Korshid claimed in the letter, which he circulated on Twitter.
Gilbert told the Guardian she would write back to the AMA, but said any interpretation that she had blamed or disparaged healthcare workers was wrong.
"I don't blame anyone for anything," she said. "What I criticised is the absence of adequate training of healthcare workers [in PPE] for years. Many healthcare workers have not been adequately trained.
"I certainly do not blame individual healthcare workers. I would not dream of doing that. I have accused some hospital administrators of apathy.
"I absolutely do not blame frontline healthcare workers, and they do a wonderful job under very difficult circumstances."
She said training on the use of PPE in healthcare settings had improved since the coronavirus pandemic, and she had "no doubt" that in Melbourne hospitals, PPE and infection control training had "dramatically improved".
According to Victorian government data, there have been 3,570 confirmed infections among healthcare workers, with 2,602 of those cases acquired in the workplace.
Of the total cases among healthcare workers, 1,740 worked in aged care and 1,090 in hospitals.
Gilbert said the ICEG had conscientiously kept up to date with the latest science on how the disease could be spread and controlled, and had updated its guidance on PPE as evidence was gathered.
"This is a group of people who are very experienced, and they do this at the frontline in hospitals all the time."
Prof Peter Collignon, an infectious diseases expert at Australian National University and a member of ICEG, told Guardian Australia that an insistence on mandatory N95 masks was not consistent with the evidence on how the virus spread.
While there was evidence for some airborne spread, the evidence from around the world showed the virus was spread mostly through respiratory droplets.
"There's this almost hysteria about aerosols and the fear that generates is out of proportion."
He said how PPE was removed after work – including masks and other protective wear – was more important than the type of mask worn.
"A lot of people making these arguments have not been involved in infection control for very long."