Coronavirus Australia: the week at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across the country
Here are all the latest developments in the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Mostafa Rachwani and it's Friday 20 November. This is the final edition of Coronavirus Australia: the week at a glance, for now. We are putting the series on hold.
South Australia has had a rollercoaster week, announcing Friday that restrictions will ease after it emerged someone in the so-called Parafield cluster lied to the contact-tracing team.
A security guard at a quarantine hotel who tested positive misled contact tracers by saying he had gone to the Woodville Pizza Bar to buy a pizza – when he had in fact been working multiple shifts there.
The fuming premier, Steven Marshall, explained that health authorities mistakenly thought the outbreak was worse than it was because the man claimed to have been a customer and not a close contact of another positive worker at the pizza shop.
The week saw escalating restrictions in SA as it seemed the state was going the way of Victoria and heading towards a second wave.
But from midnight on Saturday, restrictions will return to where they were on Monday 16 November, with schools, hospitality venues, and gyms to reopen. Weddings, funerals and public gatherings will all return to their caps pre-lockdown.
The state-wide lockdown began on Thursday with South Australians facing some of the toughest restrictions in the country. The initial plan was to have a "circuit breaker" for six days before revising restrictions thereafter.
The Parafield cluster currently stands at 25 cases with thousands of close contacts being tested.
Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania, Queensland and the Northern Territory closed their borders to South Australians earlier in the week, when the growing cluster initially emerged.
People on some flights to those states from South Australia were asked to either return or enter quarantine upon arrival.
Victoria initiated a 48-hour hard border on Thursday, with the state government announcing it would set up a permit scheme for those needing to cross the border.
New South Wales, on the other hand, didn't close its borders, instead screening arrivals by train, plane and bus, and asking arrivals to monitor for symptoms and get tested if any emerged.
It not yet clear states will reopen their borders now that restrictions in South Australia are set to ease.
Although Victoria has now gone 21 days without a locally acquired case, it did find fragments of the virus in wastewater at Portland and Benalla, 65km from the South Australian border.
Victorian authorities have asked anyone who is a resident of either town and anyone who visited or passed through between 15 and 17 November, to be alert for Covid-19 symptoms and get a test if anything comes up.
The New South Wales premier, Gladys Berejiklian, announced that the state would ease some restrictions and introduce special rules for New Year's Eve.
Designated areas will be set up for frontline workers to attend the celebrations in premium locations across the harbour.
Up to 3,000 people will be able to attend outdoor events on the night, as long as Covid guidelines are met.
Anyone visiting friends or family in the Sydney CBD will require a permit to do so. A special public order will be introduced to create a restricted zone around the CBD, and anyone hoping to attend functions within it must apply through Services NSW to do so.
To reduce congestion, the midnight fireworks have also been reduced to seven minutes.
NSW police will have the power to move people on without a permit, should they gather in large numbers across the CBD.
NSW has now recorded 13 straight days without a locally acquired case, with the premier also announcing further restrictions being eased from 23 November, including increased caps to outdoor gatherings, religious services, and funerals.
Melbourne will become home to the southern hemisphere's largest influenza vaccine manufacturing centre with an $800m investment from CSL subsidiary Seqirus.
The deal was brokered to ensure the long-term supply of vaccines and critical health products, including influenza vaccines and anti-venoms.
The centre will be supported by a $1bn 12-year supply agreement with the federal government and is expected to be operational by 2026.