South Australia and Adelaide Covid lockdown rules and coronavirus restrictions explained
SA premier Steven Marshall announces six-day lockdown for entire state amid Covid-19 outbreak and more cases in Parafield cluster. Here's what you need to know
The South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, has announced the early end of a planned six-day lockdown after one male who tested positive for Covid-19 had misled contact tracers.
The stay at home order currently in place for the state will come to an end at midnight on Saturday, Marshall announced, but some restrictions would remain in place to give contact tracers breathing room, until 1 December when the border between South Australia and Victoria was due to reopen.
"I will not let the disgraceful conduct of a single individual to keep SA in these circuit breaker conditions one day longer than what is necessary," he said.
Until 11.59pm on Saturday, the following restrictions apply across the state:
No one in the state is allowed to leave their homes for, other than for essential reasons.
All schools are shut, with only vulnerable children and children of essential workers given exclusions.
Childcare is closed, but children of essential workers are excluded.
Takeaway food shops are shut.
Universities are shut.
Restaurants, cafes, pubs, food courts and other food venues are closed.
Weddings and funerals are banned.
Elective surgeries are halted, with exceptions made for urgent operations.
Home inspections and auctions are halted.
People are not allowed to travel within the state, including to holiday homes.
Schoolies has been cancelled.
Aged care and residential disability care facilities are in lockdown.
Factories are closed, with exceptions made for food and medical products and essential maintenance.
The construction industry must shut down for the duration of the lockdown.
People are advised to wear face masks when they leave their homes, although it is encouraged not mandatory.
Families with joint custody arrangements have been asked to find an arrangement that works for the next six days, without moving between houses.
The essential reasons for leaving home are:
To go to work as an emergency services worker or to work providing essential services.
For exercise, which can be in household groups
For agricultural work.
To receive medical care including seeking Covid-19 testing.
To obtain medical supplies.
One person from the household once a day to attend supermarkets to obtain essential supplies.
Organised end of life visits.
In an emergency situation.
The following remain open:
Supermarkets, but only one person per household will be allowed to shop a day.
Critical infrastructure, such as power and telecommunications.
Medical services, including mental health services.
Public transport will continue to run.
The post office and financial institutions.
The airport will remain open, and freight services will continue to operate.
Petrol stations.
Mining, smelting, and large factories will be allowed to continue to operate at a level required to ensure continuity of service delivery or to prevent damage, but not for anything else.
Agriculture workers will be able to move around, but only to ensure the safety and welfare of animals and animal products.
Veterinary surgeons will remain open.
From 11.59pm on Saturday, the stay at home order is rescinded, and restrictions revert back to what they were on 16 November, including:
A one person per four square metres rule for venues
Hospitality limited to 100 people, and 10 people per table booking, and people must sit to eat and drink.
Funerals allowed to have 50 people.
Weddings up to 150 people, but no dancing, and people must sit to eat and drink.
Religious ceremonies limited to 100 people.
Private gatherings limited to 50 people.
A maximum of 10 people in homes.
Personal care providers such as hairdressers and beauty therapists will be required to wear masks, and patrons will strongly be encouraged to wear masks at the same time.
Gyms will re-open.
Schools re-open on Monday, 23 November.