Disadvantaged and strongly religious people less likely to get Covid vaccine – survey
Women slightly less likely than men to be vaccinated, and those 55 and older less likely to hesitate
People living in disadvantaged areas, people with populist views and people who are more religious are more likely to be hesitant or resistant to being vaccinated against Covid-19, the first nationally representative survey of attitudes towards a virus vaccine has found.
The survey found those with higher levels of household income, those who adopt public health measures and people who are more supportive of migration were more likely to get vaccinated.
The findings come from a survey of 3,061 Australian adults carried out by the Australian National University's centre for social research and methods and funded by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
Almost three in five Australians (58.5%) said they would definitely get a vaccine once it was available, and 6% said they definitely would not. Another 7% said they probably would not get the vaccine.
Women were slightly less likely than men to intend to get the vaccine, while those aged 55 and older were less likely to be hesitant than those between 35 and 44.
"Compared to those who had year 12 education only, those with an undergraduate or postgraduate university degree were less likely to be resistant or hesitant and more likely to intend to be vaccinated," the study found.
People who downloaded the Covidsafe app, who had more confidence in their state or territory government or confidence in their hospitals, or were more supportive of migration were also more likely to intend to get vaccinated. Those with views categorised as "populist" – for example that "most politicians do not care about the people", "politicians are the main problem in Australia" or that "the people, and not politicians, should make our most important policy decisions" – were more likely to be hesitant or resistant to a vaccine, as were those who were more religious.
Associate Prof Ben Edwards, a co-author of the study, said the data was collected before promising results from phase three clinical Covid-19 vaccine trials were released this month, so it was difficult to say whether that news may have changed people's views. But he said the respondents would be followed up periodically to see if their views had changed.
"What we do know from other research more broadly about vaccine resistance is those who are most against vaccination tend to be very fixed in their views," Edwards said.
"I don't think that 6% in our study will change. But the group of most interest from a policy point of view are those who are not certain. This survey, however, didn't ask them why they were uncertain."
Prof Julie Leask is a social scientist with the University of Sydney who is globally recognised for her work in behavioural aspects of vaccine hesitancy and refusal. She said people should interpret the results of the survey positively, given 87% of people would definitely or probably get vaccinated.
"That's not a high level of resistance for a new vaccine still being trialled," Leask said.
She said previous research into attitudes around childhood vaccinations found there are two groups least likely to vaccinate their children: the wealthy and the very poor, though for different reasons.
"With Covid-19, we have seen consistently that it is people with lower education and lower health literacy who are slightly less willing to have the vaccine, suggesting there also might be some ideological issues at play," she said.
What the Australian National University study had not tested was how to address vaccine hesitancy and achieve higher vaccine uptake.
"The authors suggested it may be a matter of nuanced messaging and this helps but more is needed," she said.
But Leask said other research had found measures such as training healthcare workers appropriately, accrediting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health workers to vaccinate, working with community and religious leaders, and ensuring each service has enough vaccine supply were all measures that promoted higher uptake.
"It is really important that when people do get vaccinated, their encounter with the health worker is a positive experience," she said.