South Australia's Covid lockdown explained: why six days and isn't 36 cases low?
Authorities are moving fast over concerns that at least five generations of cases have already been identified in Adelaide
South Australia has announced a strict six-day lockdown to take effect from midnight Wednesday in order to curb the spread of Covid-19 . The move surprised some given there were just 36 active cases in the state on that date.
South Australia's chief health officer, Prof Nicola Spurrier, said it is of concern that health authorities have so far identified at least five generations of cases. In epidemiology, the first case of the virus, or the index case, is known as "generation zero".
The patients then infected by patient zero within 14 days are the "first-generation" of cases. The "second generation" are Covid-19 cases who were exposed to first-generation cases [but not patient zero], while the "third-generation" are those infected by the second generation [but not the prior generations], and so on.
Spurrier said the issue for South Australian authorities is they have found cases up to the fourth generation, and are now looking for cases in the fifth and sixth generations. "At the moment in South Australia we have done contact tracing to the fourth generation but the fifth generation is out there in our community, and we are getting up to the sixth," she said.
This means the virus may not only be spreading in groups of people close to each other, such as a family members. However, Spurrier said all cases so far have been linked to another case, which is good news. Of the active cases, 22 are linked to the Parafield outbreak.
"This particular strain has had certain characteristics," Spurrier said. "It has a very, very short incubation period. That means when somebody gets exposed, it is taking 24 hours or even less for that person to become infectious to others and the other characteristic of the cases we have seen so far is they have had minimal symptoms and sometimes no symptoms, but have been able to pass it to other people."
While most people – about 50% – become infectious with Covid-19 on day five, Prof Mary-Louise McLaws, an epidemiologist and adviser to the World Health Organization, said there were always people who became infectious as soon as day one, or as late as day 14.
"They've acted fast because despite the low case numbers, they realise it's spread and fast," McLaws said. "A lockdown is cheaper than a second wave."
The premier, Steven Marshall, said he had spoken to the prime minister and the chief executive of the Department of Health and "the strong advice" from the health department was to lock down. "This is a particularly sneaky strain of this virus," he said. "A highly contagious strain … and if we don't get on top of that very, very quickly it will get away from us and that will be disastrous for us in South Australia."
Associate prof Paul Griffin, the director of infectious diseases at Mater Health Services, said unlike New South Wales and Victoria, South Australia didn't have a boosted contact tracing system, or technology widely rolled out in restaurants to scan details in and contact trace more quickly. If numbers grew, life could get difficult fast for health authorities, he said.
"It's always hard to know the magnitude of the response," Griffin said. "If the response is too little the situation will escape. If it's too aggressive people will say it seems like an overexaggeration. But what's clear is this situation has the potential to grow quickly."
Victoria's acting chief health officer and epidemiologist, Prof Allen Cheng, said a more infectious strain was unlikely. There could be a simpler explanation, he said.
Epidemiologists examine something called the "serial interval", which is the time between symptoms developing in one person [the infector] and symptoms developing in the people they infected [their infectees]. There is also the "incubation period"; the time between an individual being infected and actually showing symptoms.
Cheng said contact tracing may be so swift and strong in South Australia that infectees were being identified through testing in the incubation period, before they had even developed symptoms, or very early during symptom onset.
"When you have very good contact tracing you cut that time period off, you've found them on the first or second day of when they are infectious and it makes the serial interval look shorter, which can alarm people because it seems like people are becoming infected very quickly. But serial intervals looking short can actually be a good sign that contact tracing is rapid."
Cheng said authorities were right to be cautious though, given there was always the possibility there could be something genuinely odd about this strain and it was still early days.
"South Australian authorities will know more than we do," he said. "Nicola Spurrier is very experienced and if she says they need a lockdown, then she is to be trusted."
On 1 July, a day when 60 cases of the virus had been identified overnight in Victoria, the state government tried to lock down hotspot suburbs rather than the whole state. On 7 July, metropolitan Melbourne and the Mitchell shire followed suit, in order for contact tracing to catch up and because the targeted lockdown was not suppressing spread enough, with almost 200 cases identified overnight. By 3 August, regional Victoria also moved into lockdown, and a curfew was introduced in the rest of the state. Targeted lockdowns did not work to contain the spread, and ultimately, the entire state was placed into a lengthy and strict lockdown.
"You can only put a fence around a suburb or building if you know all of the cases are captured there," McLaws said. "A virus doesn't respect a fence. So South Australia locking down now will buy them time to contact trace and flush this out."
Spurrier said: "We don't have a ring road or a circle of steel that we can put in place, and the other thing is, I don't know if somebody who went and got a pizza at the Woodville pizza bar then went and travelled somewhere into our regional centres, so this is applying to everybody in South Australia, and we are all going to do this together."
However, the infectious diseases physician Prof Peter Collignon said given there were no mystery cases in South Australia, the lockdown did seem "a bit extreme" to him. "It's interesting that they seem to be looking more towards the experience in Victoria, rather than New South Wales, where authorities managed to get on top of some large clusters without as harsh measures."
The incubation period for Covid-19 is on average five to six days, however it can be up to 14 days, which is why people are asked to quarantine for two weeks to be safe.
McLaws said six days represented the average incubation period, "but as an outbreak manager you'd normally choose a lockdown period of 14 days".
"But outbreak managers are not the same as economists or people governing, so there is probably a balance struck," she said.
"They will see how many positive people surface in six days, and then they can decide where to go from there. But with only six days, contact tracing must be done rapidly and it must include the contacts of those contacts. So it may not seem like a lot of cases, but when you multiply those cases by potentially 10 or 20 contacts for each case per day, it can become difficult to trace very quickly, especially if your contact tracer numbers have not been boosted yet. Within just 48 hours, this virus can become seeded in the community."