South Australia facing second wave of coronavirus after hotel quarantine breach
State reports 17 cases of community transmission leading to new restrictions on social gatherings, dining and gyms
International flights into South Australia have been suspended for this week, gyms will close and there will be a cap of 100 people at pubs, clubs and restaurants as the state moves to tackle a growing cluster of Covid-19 cases for the first time since April.
The premier, Steven Marshall, announced the restrictions on Monday after the state reported 17 cases of Covid-19 connected to an outbreak from a quarantine hotel for returned travellers.
"Time is now the essence and we must act swiftly and decisively," he said. "We cannot wait to see how bad this gets. We must act swiftly and decisively on the health advice to stay ahead of the game."
New restrictions in force for two weeks from Tuesday mean people in South Australia will not be able to go to gyms, recreational facilities, trampoline centres and play cafes.
Pubs, clubs and restaurants are capped at 100 people per venue, with a maximum booking of 10 people. Private gatherings at venues are capped at 50. Private residence gatherings are capped at 10 people. Cinemas and theatres are restricted to one person per four square metres.
Funerals are capped at 50 people, with one person per four square metres. Churches are capped at 100 people. At weddings, all guests must be registered, but there are no changes to numbers.
Masks are mandatory for personal care service providers and encouraged for clients. People are encouraged to wear masks where they cannot socially distance, and people who can work from home are being advised to do so.
The state's chief health officer, Prof Nicola Spurrier, stressed the importance of getting on top of testing and contact tracing.
"What we are facing is, indeed, a second wave but we haven't got [to] the second wave yet. We are in very, very early days," Spurrier said. "So the first thing we need to do, from my team's point of view, is the testing, contact tracing and getting people into quarantine very, very quickly."
On Sunday, South Australia reported three cases of community transmission, the first in the state since 16 April. A woman in her 80s and two of her family members in their 50s and 60s tested positive – one of whom worked in a quarantine hotel for returned travellers.
Fifteen of the 17 cases reported on Monday were linked to one family.
The Mawson Lakes primary school and Thomas Moore college were both closed after a student from each school tested positive.
The state's health authorities were contact tracing 90 staff at the Lyell McEwin hospital who may have come into contact with the woman in her 80s.
South Australia Health has issued alerts for times and locations for people who may have come into contact with an infectious person. People who visited those locations were told to monitor for symptoms.
The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said he was confident the South Australian contact tracing system could get on top of the outbreak, following a briefing by the acting chief medical officer Prof Paul Kelly.
"The advice is that the system in South Australia is strong. We are standing up the national incident centre contact tracing capability to assist South Australia," Hunt said. "But these are the sorts of challenges that if we trade or engage with the world, if we bring Australians home, we will face."
In response to the SA outbreak, Tasmania, Western Australia, the Northern Territory, and Queensland all mandated hotel quarantine or isolation at home for travellers from South Australia.
About 500 people who had arrived in Western Australia since the border with South Australia opened on Friday night were being tracked and told to isolate for 14 days.
But the New South Wales premier, Gladys Berejiklian, said her state's borders would remain open as Australia needed to learn to live with Covid.
"You can't shut down border and disrupt lives every time there is an outbreak and disrupt businesses. We need to have confidence, not just in our own system, but the system in other states to be able to get on top of the virus," she said.
"That is why I got frustrated when places like Queensland and WA keep their borders up – they haven't tested their systems. Who would have thought there would be an outbreak in South Australia? They have had relatively more open borders than other states."
Victoria, which has recorded no new cases of Covid-19 or deaths in 17 days, declared South Australia a Covid-19 hotspot, but did not rush to close the border.
The premier, Daniel Andrews, said anyone arriving at Melbourne airport from South Australia would be required to go through an interview and potentially a rapid test for Covid-19.
The state's deputy chief health officer, Allen Cheng, said in a statement passengers would be asked to isolate and get tested if they were coming from an area of risk identified by the South Australian government. If they refused to get tested they would be treated as a close contact and be asked to self-isolate for 14 days.
The prime minister, Scott Morrison, was in Victoria on Monday for the first time since February and said the outbreak in South Australia served as a wake-up call.
"It's a reminder even after a lockdown, even after all of this time, the virus hasn't gone anywhere and it can be activated, and that's why none of us can be off our game," he told 3AW radio. "We've got to stay match-fit on this all the time."