Brett Sutton tells quarantine inquiry he stands by evidence, despite inconsistencies
Victoria's chief health officer 'did not read or register' newly released emails mentioning security guards in botched hotel quarantine program
Victoria's chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, has dismissed "apparent inconsistencies" in his evidence to the hotel quarantine inquiry after newly released emails revealed more instances where he was alerted to the use of private security guards in the program earlier than he said he was aware.
Sutton told the inquiry in September he did not know private security guards were involved in the botched quarantine program until the Covid-19 outbreak at the Rydges hotel in May, which ultimately led to most of the 20,000 cases in Victoria's second wave.
Late on Friday afternoon, the Victorian hotel quarantine inquiry released hundreds of pages of emails, call records, meeting notes and affidavits obtained in the two months since the inquiry held its last hearing.
The inquiry had already heard that Sutton had been CC'ed on an email mentioning private security would be used shortly after the program launched in March. Emails released by the inquiry on Friday show Sutton was included on two more emails that refer to private security.
An email from 1 April refers to the need for a policy around smoking breaks, with mention of security guards to escort the smokers.
In response to a question from the inquiry, Sutton said in an affidavit released on Friday that he was aware that the emails showed an "apparent inconsistency" with his earlier evidence. But he maintained he was unaware of the use of private security guards in hotel quarantine until late May.
"I accept that there is an apparent inconsistency. I do however stand by my evidence that I was not aware of the use of private security guards until the outbreak occurred," he said.
"Although I accept that private security was referred to in emails that I received, I did not read or register the information that private security guards were being used in hotel quarantine."
Sutton said even if he had been aware at the time, he would not have known of the potential issues with using security guards.
"At that time, the use of private security was not considered controversial or risky from a public health point of view," he said.
"At that time, I did not have a view about the use of private security in the program. I did not have a sufficient understanding of that workforce for its use to have raised a flag with me, or to consider them to be an inappropriate workforce."
Sutton said at the time he was receiving a huge volume of emails and did not have time to pay attention to issues outside his area of responsibility.
"I simply did not have time to focus on matters that were outside my area of responsibility as I was already fully stretched (as was everyone) handling the matters that were in my area of responsibility," he said.
An email from deputy public health commander Dr Finn Romanes on 1 April, on which Sutton was included, put Sutton at the top of the chain of command for the welfare of those in hotel quarantine.
But Sutton told the inquiry that simply referred to getting exemptions from the order to quarantine, and was not an indication that he was ultimately responsible for the entire Operation Soteria, the name given to the hotel quarantine program. Sutton has maintained he believed he should have been responsible from the start, in the state controller role.
This is backed up by emails between Sutton and the Department of Health and Human Services's now secretary, Euan Wallace, on 13 April. In the newly released emails, Sutton expressed frustration that he and his deputy, Annaliese van Diemen, were excluded from oversight of the program.
"Operation Soteria was – as an illustration – set up and put into place through EMV/State controller without even getting my approval or even input. Annaliese was similarly excluded. That, in and of itself, is astounding to us."
In other evidence provided to the inquiry, the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, maintained he expressed no view about the use of private security to the then head of his department, Chris Eccles, during national cabinet on 27 March, when the program was developed.
Text messages between Andrews and his chief of staff, Lissie Ratcliff, from 27 March only show the premier checking in about the first arrivals to be sent to quarantine from the next day, without any reference to security.
Eccles and former police commissioner Graham Ashton have also maintained they do not remember what was said in a crucial conversation just after 1pm on March 27, when Ashton learned private security would be used.
The inquiry will hand its final report to government on 21 December. The head of the inquiry, Jennifer Coate, said there had been more than 60,000 documents provided to the inquiry, made up of more than 300,000 pages, 25 days of hearings, 63 witnesses and 171 notices to produce issued.