South Australia confirms new Covid case after announcing hotel quarantine reforms
There was no immediate word on whether the case was linked to so-called Parafield cluster or represented wider community transmission
South Australia has confirmed a new Covid-19 infection was detected in a female student at an Adelaide high school following the announcement of sweeping reforms to the state's hotel quarantine system.
SA Health said late on Wednesday that anyone who attended Woodville high school on Monday must isolate immediately with all members of their households after a student tested positive for the virus.
There was no immediate word on whether the case was linked to so-called Parafield cluster or represented wider community transmission.
The school will be closed on Thursday to undergo deep cleaning and to allow authorities to conducted detailed contact tracing and make a risk assessment.
Earlier on Wednesday, the premier, Steven Marshall, said anyone who tested positive, including returned travellers, would be moved to a dedicated health facility.
That was most likely to be a previously disused private hospital which was refurbished and brought back into service when the pandemic first struck.
All security at that facility will be provided by police and staff will not be allowed to work at other high-risk locations, including prisons and aged care centres.
As an added security measure, Marshall will ask national cabinet to consider testing all Australians returning from overseas before they are allowed to board their flights.
A negative test would be required before anyone is permitted to travel, under SA's proposal.
The premier said while no system could eliminate all risk, the government would do whatever it could to make the quarantine arrangements safer.
"We continue to act swiftly and decisively based on the expert health advice," Marshall said.
"What we must do is put as many shields as possible between the virus and the community."
So far 29 cases have been linked to the so-called Parafield cluster which was sparked when a worker at the Peppers hotel contracted the virus from a returned traveller.
A review of CCTV footage from the facility had since cleared all workers of breaching any major safety protocols.
The schoolgirl's case took the number of active infections in SA to 39.
SA Health said more than 9,400 tests were conducted on Tuesday, while on Wednesday a new regulation came into force requiring all people working in quarantine hotels to have weekly coronavirus swabs.
The direction applies to SA Health officials, defence force personnel and all employees and contractors, including cleaning and security staff.
Amid growing calls for a wider independent investigation into the hotel quarantine issues, Marshall said such an inquiry would be conducted but not until after the pandemic emergency had passed.
A police investigation is already under way into the incorrect information that sparked last week's brief statewide lockdown after it prompted fears of widespread community transmission from the Parafield cluster.
As that probe continues, SA has put international arrivals on hold and has decided to deep clean the Peppers hotel.
Marshall said South Australia remained committed to playing its part in the repatriation process and would resume international flights when it was safe to do so, although probably at lower numbers than in recent weeks.
He said SA also remained on course to ease local Covid-19 restrictions from 1 December.
He plans to lift the state's border restrictions with Victoria at that time.