Coronavirus: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
South Africa will further relax its coronavirus lockdown restrictions from 1 June, President Cyril Ramaphosa has announced, allowing areas of the economy to reopen fully. It will include an easing of the ban on alcohol, allowing its sale for consumption at home on certain days and at certain times.
The total number of confirmed coronavirus cases stands at 5,380,774, according to Johns Hopkins University tracker. There have been 343,880 deaths linked to the coronavirus.
The Austrian president, Alexander van der Bellen, has apologised after staying at a restaurant past the 11pm closing time mandated by the government as part of its anti-coronavirus measures. The president said on Twitter that he "lost track of time" and offered to "take responsibility" in the event that the restaurant owner, who claimed to have misunderstood the details of the curfew, is fined due to the incident.
Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro has once again encouraged a rally in the country's capital to back his administration, days after Brazil passed Russia to become the world's No 2 coronavirus hotspot after the US. The demonstration came amid a political scandal revolving around an accusation that Bolsonaro aimed to interfere in police investigations.
The White House has announced that it is prohibiting foreigners from travelling to the US if they had been in Brazil in the last two weeks, after the South American nation became the world No 2 hot spot for coronavirus cases. The White House press secretary, Kayleigh McEnany, said the new restrictions would help to ensure that foreign nationals do not bring additional infections to the US, but would not apply to the flow of commerce between the new countries.
Dominic Cummings, the UK government's chief strategist, is facing a possible police investigation under health laws over a claim that he breached self-isolation rules in north-east England. The complaint was made by Robin Lees, a retired chemistry teacher, who says he saw Cummings and his family in Barnard Castle on 12 April.
Chile's president Sebastian Pinera has said the country's healthcare system is "very close to the limit" following a rapid rise in infections in recent days that has brought the country's total close to 70,000. The ministry of health reported 3,709 new cases in the last 24 hours, bringing the total to 69,102. The death toll is at 718.
Domestic flights will resume across India on Monday, the federal civil aviation minister has said, despite a 24-hour record increase in new cases on Sunday. Flights will restart under a relaxation of restrictions, even though 6,767 new cases brought India's total to over 131,000.
New York recorded 109 deaths from Covid-19 in 24 hours, representing a slight increase on the previous day. The governor, Andrew Cuomo, called on New Yorkers to remain vigilant. "What do we really think, this is the last time we are going to have a public health emergency?" Cuomo said. "Let's make sure we are better for what we have gone through."