Coronavirus 24 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
The UK prime minister has used the daily briefing to lend his support to Dominic Cummings, following reports that his chief strategist broke lockdown rules on at least one occasion. Boris Johnson described Cummings as acting "responsibly, legally and with integrity".
The total number of confirmed coronavirus cases stands at 5,354,539, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker. There have been 343,116 deaths officially linked to coronavirus around the world.
The US is likely to impose travel restrictions on Brazil on Sunday, the White House national security adviser has said, after the South American country became the nation with the second biggest number of coronavirus cases. The country became the No 2 hot spot for cases on Friday, second only to the US. Brazil has recorded over 347,000 infections, while the US has over 1.6 million.
The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Canada has risen to 84,081 from 82,892. There have been 103 more deaths, bringing the country's toll to 6,380.
German authorities are trying to trace the people who attended a church service in Frankfurt after 107 locals later tested positive for coronavirus. The service took place at a Baptist church on 10 May, and it is not clear whether all 107 attended the service, or whether the figure includes those who were infected by those who did.
The French government has discouraged citizens from travelling abroad this summer, recommending that they holiday in France, the environment minister, Elisabeth Borne, has said. This follows Emmanuel Macron saying it was unlikely that French people would be able to undertake major foreign trips this summer.
South Africa's AngloGold Ashanti has suspended operations at its Mponeng mine after at least 164 employees tested positive for coronavirus. The mining company said it had tested 650 workers at the gold mining site in Merafong, Gauteng province, after a case was detected last week. Contact tracing and sanitisation processes are under way.
China's top diplomat Wang Yi has said the US should stop wasting time in its fight against the coronavirus and work with China to combat it, instead of smearing the country. State councillor Wang made his comments while expressing his sympathy to the US for the pandemic, where the death toll is approaching 100,000.
Thousands of pro-democracy protesters assembled in Hong Kong against a controversial security law proposed by China, defying a coronavirus measure banning gatherings of more than eight people. The planned legislation is expected to ban treason, subversion and sedition, and the clashes between police and demonstrators were the most intense seen in months.
There were 50 new coronavirus deaths in Italy on Sunday, however the latest figures did not include deaths in the worst-hit region ofLombardy due to late reporting. The number of new infections rose by 531, down from 669 on Saturday. There have been 32,785 deaths and 140,479 people have recovered.