Coronavirus 21 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Latin America has reported more new coronavirus cases than either the United States or Europe for three days in a row, driven by high numbers in Brazil, Peru and Mexico, CNN analysis of Johns Hopkins University and World Health Organization data shows. The region reported at least 32,854 new cases on Wednesday, more than half of which were in Brazil.
Italy's coronavirus death toll in March and April could be nearly 19,000 higher than the official figure of 32,000, the national social security agency said Thursday. As of Friday, the pandemic has claimed 32,486 deaths in Italy, of which 26,715 have been in Lombardy alone, Europe's worst affected region.
Brazil's president Jair Bolsonaro said he will sign off a 60 billion-real ($10.72 bn) federal aid programme for states and cities hit by coronavirus, but asked governors for support by freezing public sector pay increases.
A scientific adviser to the British government has said that he would have liked ministers to have acted "a week or two weeks earlier" in the virus pandemic. Ian Boyd, who sits on the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), which advises ministers on Covid-19, said it would have made "quite a big difference" to the death rate.
Ramzan Kadyrov is in a Moscow hospital suffering from suspected coronavirus, Russian news agencies reported, adding that the ally of Vladimir Putin was "under medical supervision" and in a "stable" condition.
Russia's industrial output fell by 6.6% in April compared to the previous year, with its economy predicted to shrink by up to 6% in 2020. Russia imposed a "non-working" period across the country at the end of April, and Russia's Audit Chamber predicts that the number of unemployed will grow from 2.5 million to eight million this year.
Half of Facebook's workforce could shift to permanent home working by the end of the decade, founder Mark Zuckerberg has revealed, saying it was "quite possible" that over the next five to 10 years about 50% of staff at the company could be working from home.
More than 1,200 California pastors say they will resume in-person services this month in defiance of governor Gavin Newsom's stay-at-home order to slow the spread of coronavirus. California has more than 85,700 coronavirus cases and more than 3,400 deaths.
Puerto Rico will cautiously reopen beaches, restaurants, churches, malls and hair salons next week under strict new rules as the US territory emerges from a two-month lockdown that stifled business activity on an island that now has a 40% unemployment rate.