Coronavirus 21 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
The World Health Organization (WHO) warned on Wednesday that the coronavirus pandemic is far from over, after 106,000 new cases were recorded worldwide over the past 24 hours – the most in a single day so far. The WHO's director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said the virus was spreading in poorer countries, just as wealthier nations were emerging from lockdown.
Spain's daily death toll from the novel coronavirus was 48, its health ministry said on Thursday, marking the first time it has dipped below 50 since 16 March.
The Silicon Valley giant has launched a Covid-19 exposure notification feature in the latest update of its iPhone operating system. The software will offer health authorities a way to build apps that can alert people about corona-positive users they have come into contact with, while preserving their anonymity.
The total number of initial unemployment benefit claims filed in the US since mid-March is now over 38 million, or over a fifth of the US workforce. It is the ninth week in a row in which millions of US citizens signed on for welfare benefits, having lost their jobs in the lockdown.
East Africa is facing a "triple menace" of mutually exacerbating disasters, as ongoing heavy rain hampers attempts to deal with swarms of locusts in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak, the Red Cross says.
Bangladesh has reported its highest daily increase in coronavirus cases, as it begins cleaning up after the fiercest cyclone to hit the country since 1999 - 1,773 more people tested positive for the coronavirus in the past 24 hours, bringing the total number of cases in the country to 28,511.
Afghanistan's health ministry said it has run out of hospital beds for Covid-19 patients in most parts of the war-torn country, as the capital Kabul recorded its second worst day of the crisis.
The official coronavirus death toll in Russia passed 3,000 on Thursday, as a US transport plane made its way to deliver ventilators to help treat Russian patients severely ill with Covid-19.
The Chinese city where the first coronavirus cases were recorded has officially banned eating wild animals. According to the Wuhan municipal government it is now prohibited to eat, hunt or breed wild animals, including terrestrial animals deemed as protected, as well as those that exist in the wild or are bred.