Coronavirus 20 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
The World Health Organization issued a stark warning that the pandemic was far from over as 106,000 new cases were recorded worldwide in 24 hours – the most in a single day so far.
Speaking in Geneva, the WHO's director general, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said the virus was spreading in poorer countries just as wealthier nations were emerging from lockdown.
According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, at least 4.9 million people are known to have become infected since the outbreak began and at least 326,000 are known to have died.
The figures, based on official tallies and media reports, are likely to underestimate the true scale of the pandemic due to differing testing and recording systems and suspected undercounting.
Tourists will be welcomed back to Greece from 15 June, the country's prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, has announced. He said seasonal hotels could reopen and direct international flights would resume during a televised address.
Oxfam International is to lay off almost 1,500 staff and close operations in 18 countries – including Afghanistan, where it has worked for 50 years – as the global aid organisation sees its funding model hit by an accumulation of crises during the pandemic.
South Africa has recorded its first neonatal coronavirus death, the country's health ministry has said. The two-day old baby was born prematurely and had lung difficulties that required ventilation support immediately after birth, the health minister, Zweli Mkhize, said.
The US president said he is considering reviving a face-to-face meeting of Group of Seven leaders near Washington, after earlier cancelling the gathering. While thousands per day continue to die globally, Donald Trump said the move would be a "great sign to all" and would represent "normalisation".
The South American nation confirmed that it had now identified more than 100,000 cases, making it the 12th country in the world to pass the milestone. The death toll in Peru, which has been under nationwide lockdown since March, rose to 3,024.
The prospect of a second wave of infection across Europe is no longer merely theoretical, according to the director of the EU agency responsible for advising governments on disease control.
"The question is when and how big. That is the question in my view," said Dr Andrea Ammon, director of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control.
International imports and exports have fallen to their lowest level for at least four years, according to World Trade Organization figures. Warning that there was little prospect of the downturn ending soon, the global authority on trade said it believed import and export activity would fall precipitously in the first half of 2020.