Qantas decision to fill Australian flights to capacity condemned by infectious disease experts
Airline chief Alan Joyce says providing social distancing on planes would not be financially viable
Qantas's decision to make mask-wearing on flights optional has been slammed by infectious disease experts as the airline announces it will not reduce passenger numbers to allow physical distancing.
The announcement comes as the airline prepares to ramp up its domestic flight schedule when interstate borders ease. From 12 June Qantas will roll out its "fly well" program, which includes contactless check-in, extra hand sanitiser at airports and rearranging the Qantas lounge to increase physical distancing.
Once travellers board the plane, however, these social distancing measures disappear. The company confirmed plans to fill planes to capacity, with customers sitting directly next to each other.
The Qantas Group chief executive, Alan Joyce, said at a press conference it would not be financially viable to provide social distancing on flights.
"If we take the middle seat, airfares will probably go up by around 50% … but even the middle seat only gives you 60 centimetres between passengers."
Joyce said only 22 passengers could fit on an aeroplane if they were to observe the recommended 1.5m.
"That means airfares are going to be eight to nine times more than they are today. And so, if it's not needed and it isn't needed by the medical advice, it definitely economically will not be justified."
But the airline will put other safety measures in place. Boarding and disembarking would be coordinated to avoid crowds, moving around the cabin would be discouraged, food services limited, and alcohol wipes and a face mask would be provided to every passenger.
Unlike a number of airlines in the US, Qantas will recommend masks be worn but will not make it mandatory.
Professor Marylouise McLaws, an epidemiologist and infectious disease expert at the University of New South Wales, said the decision "fails the test of logic".
"Preventing Covid-19 is a bundle of many things. It's staying at home when you're unwell, it's hand hygiene, plus social distancing, plus environmental cleaning. When you can't have one of those, such as social distancing, you need to protect yourself from inhaling or exhaling the virus with a mask."
A statement put out by Qantas said masks were "not mandatory from a safety point of view" and should be worn for "peace of mind". But McLaws disagrees, saying: "I think that that statement fails to fully and overtly acknowledge that Australians are still at risk of Covid … The virus is still out there, we are nowhere near zero."
She said that even if passengers could be spaced out, masks should still be worn due to people moving around the cabin.
"Going to the bathroom is a human right, you can't stop people doing that … I can't see how going down the aisle to get to the bathroom is in any way not increasing your risk, without mandatorily requiring wearing a mask."
However, representatives from Qantas said they believed physical distancing and mandatory mask-wearing were not necessary.
"Even at the peak of the pandemic when people flew with Covid, we haven't seen any confirmed cases of in-flight transmission," said Qantas's medical director, Dr Ian Hosegood. "Even globally, where thousands of people have flown with Covid, there are only a handful of suspected cases, and none confirmed."
Hosegood suggested that aeroplane features such as seats all facing the same direction, and high headrests creating barriers, made air travel safer than other forms of public transport.
"Clearly, there are people who cannot wear masks. In particular, is very challenging to have small children wear masks," he said. "There are people that have medical conditions that mean they're unable to wear a mask and some people just are very uncomfortable so mandating it is challenging."
McLaws also said that not all people could wear masks, but suggested they should instead receive special exemptions.
"Not having mandatory mask use is trusting that everybody will remember to comply at all times, will all look the same way, won't need to get up to go to the bathroom, won't gather around the carousel to get their bags," she said. "That is too much trust going on when it comes to a life-threatening disease.
"Perhaps there haven't been confirmed cases from flights, but that doesn't mean that we can't be careful, and it could just mean we haven't identified them as a risk factor yet … There are still a significant amount of cases that are under investigation."
A spokeswoman for Qantas said this policy was in line with the chief health officer's advice that masks are not mandatory in public places. She said passengers would be required to wear a mask if they displayed symptoms on a flight.
Qantas has also promoted the hospital-grade Hepa filters attached to aeroplane air-conditioning.
"[The filters] remove 99.9% of all particles including viruses," the statement said. "Air inside the cabin is refreshed on average every five minutes during flights."
But McLaws said that would not prevent transmission from those seated nearby. "Who are these filters filtering the air for? If you are sitting next to someone incubating the virus and breathing in the particles, that filter isn't going to protect you."
At Tuesday's press conference Joyce encouraged people to begin planning holidays.
"We look forward hopefully to seeing a lot of you on our flights in July for a holiday … I encourage you to do your research now, and to look at some of the very attractive airfares we're going to have … If you need to visit family and friends, now's the time to start planning."
However, it is clear the same attitude is not shared by state premiers, including those from Queensland, Western Australia and Northern Territory, who have been steadfast about keep stringent border controls in place.
McLaws also said it was too early to be encouraging unnecessary travel. "Now is the time to start understanding that you are still at risk of Covid … To start encouraging people to think that it's all over and hopping in an aeroplane or train or bus does not place you risk is a failing of moral duty."
A spokeswoman for Qantas said Joyce's comments were "entirely in line with comments made [on Tuesday] by the federal tourism minister", who encouraged states to consider relaxing border restrictions if possible.
Other aspects of the "fly well" program include enhanced cleaning of aircrafts, requiring employees to follow strict personal hygiene protocols and encouraging all passengers to download the Australian government's Covidsafe app. Passengers with cold and flu-like symptoms will be encouraged to stay home.