Coronavirus 19 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
There are 4,805,005 confirmed coronavirus cases worldwide, according to Johns Hopkins University data. The death toll stands at 318,534. US deaths, the highest worldwide, passed 90,000, and the number of cases climbed above 1.5m, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker.
Late on Monday evening, Donald Trump tweeted a letter addressed to World Health Organization director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus saying that if the WHO "does not commit to major substantive improvements within the next 30 days, I will make my temporary freeze of United States funding to the World Health Organization permanent and reconsider our membership of the organization." The letter does not detail what the improvements are.
Before Trump's letter was released, the World Health Organization said on Monday that an independent review of the global coronavirus response would begin as soon as possible . A resolution drafted by the European Union calling for an independent evaluation of the WHO's performance appeared to have won consensus backing among the WHO's 194 states. The motion is expected to be voted on on Tuesday.
After US president told reporters at the White House that he has been taking hydroxychloroquine, his doctor released a letter confirming that they had discussed the use of the drug and "concluded the potential benefit from treatment outweighed the relative risks." A White House spokesperson told the New York Times that Trump was prescribed the drug and is taking it. The US Food and Drug Administration has cautioned against use of hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine for Covid-19 outside of a hospital setting or a clinical trial due to risk of heart rhythm problems.
The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Brazil stands at 255,368, according to Johns Hopkins University figures, making the country the third-worst affected in terms of cases.There are 16,792 officially confirmed deaths in Brazil, which is lower than the UK, Italy, Spain and France.
The global economy will take much longer to recover fully from the shock caused by the new coronavirus than initially expected, the head of the International Monetary Fund said, and she stressed the danger of protectionism. Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva said the Fund was likely to revise downward its forecast for a 3% contraction in GDP in 2020, but gave no details. That would likely also trigger changes in the Fund's forecast of a partial recovery of 5.8% in 2021.
The death toll in Australia has reached 100, following the death of a 93-year-old woman who had been diagnosed with Covid-19.The woman had been a resident at Newmarch House, the aged care home in western Sydney which has been the site of a cluster of cases.
The number of confirmed cases in India has passed 100,000, currently standing at 100,328 according to Johns Hopkins University figures.The country has recorded 3,156 deaths. The government this week extended a nationwide lockdown to the end of May, but with significantly reduced restrictions, including allowing markets and standalone shops can reopen from Monday, with social distancing measures. Inter and intra-state road travel resumed with the agreement of states, but air travel, both domestic and international is still banned.