Coronavirus latest: at a glance for 18 May
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
The US president, who has repeatedly touted the malaria medicine hydroxychloroquine despite studies suggesting it is of little or no benefit to Covid-19 patients and could even put them in greater danger, claims to be taking it as a preemptive measure.
Trump made the comments as he attacked the credibility of a whistleblower who has publicly testified about internal pressure to endorse the drug as an effective coronavirus treatment.
Some areas of New York City have seen death rates nearly 15 times higher than others, according to data released by New York City's health department, showing the disproportionate toll taken on poorer communities.
For the first time, the data shows a breakdown on the number of deaths in each of the city's more than 60 zip codes.
The president of the European Central Bank, Christine Lagarde, and the Spanish prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, both applaud the Franco-German plan for a €500bn (£447bn) recovery fund.
Lagarde calls the proposal "ambitious, targeted and welcome", while Sánchez says it is a "positive step in the right direction". "Now it's time for [the] EU to put forward a proper financial package. We should keep moving forward," Sánchez adds.
According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, at least 4,782,539 people have been infected and at least 317,566 are known to have died since the pandemic began. By far the worst affected nation is the US, where at least 90,194 people are known to have perished.
Qatar will close all shops and halt all commercial activities from 19 to 30 May, state news agency QNA reports, citing a decision by Qatar's cabinet. The closure excludes pharmacies, food supply stores and food deliveries.
South Sudan's vice-president, Riek Machar, and his wife Angelina Teny have both tested positive, his office says. It adds that some of his office staff and bodyguards have also tested positive.
Italy registers 99 more deaths on Monday, the lowest daily rate since early March, and 451 new infections, down by more than 200 since Sunday.
There is also a significant fall in new infections in Lombardy, the region worst affected by the virus, from 326 on Sunday to 175 on Monday.
A total of 14,790 people died in April in Belgium – the worst toll since the country was under Nazi occupation in the 1940s, according to a study. The total is substantially higher than the normal April death toll, which is usually fewer than 9,000 people, researchers from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) found.
The country's Department of Health and Social Care releases its latest daily figures, which show a further 160 deaths, taking the total to 34,796.