Coronavirus latest 18 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
There are 4,716,513 confirmed cases of coronavirus worldwide. At least 315,187 people have died over the course of the pandemic The number of deaths in the US is approaching 90,000, with 89,562 confirmed fatalities and 1,486,757 infections, according to the Johns Hopkins university tracker.
US Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell said on Sunday that US unemployment could peak at 25%, but expressed optimism Sunday that the economy could begin to recover from a devastating recession in the second half of the year, assuming the coronavirus doesn't erupt in a second wave.
Japan dived into its first recession since 2015, according to official data Monday, with the world's third-largest economy contracting by 0.9% in the first quarter as it wrestled with the fallout from the coronavirus. The cabinet office reported a drop of 3.4% annual pace in seasonally adjusted real gross domestic product, or GDP, the total value of a nation's goods and services, for the January-March period, compared to the previous quarter.
South Africa on Sunday reported 1,160 new coronavirus infections, the highest daily number since the first case was recorded in March "As of today, the total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in South Africa is 15,515, with 1,160 new cases identified in the last 24 hour cycle of testing," the health ministry said in a statement. The Western Cape province, popular with tourists, accounted for nearly 60% of the national numbers.
In Brazil, the BBC has reported that the mayor of São Paulo, the country's largest city, has warned that hospitals have reached 90% capacity and are "near collapse"; they could run out of space in just two weeks' time, he said. Brazil has the fourth-highest number of infections worldwide, with 241,080, according to Johns Hopkins University figures. It has recorded 16,118 deaths. Meanwhile, Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro greeted hundreds of supporters and joined some in a series of push-ups who gathered before the presidential offices Sunday.
In a possible glimmer of hope, Sunday saw lower death tolls reported in the UK, Spain and Italy. The UK's daily coronavirus death toll was the lowest since lockdown began, with 170 deaths recorded. However, the Sunday and Monday figures tend to be lower than other days because of weekend testing rates. Meanwhile Spain  recorded its lowest single-day death toll in two months. Italy on Sunday recorded its lowest daily toll, 145, since lockdown was declared. There were 153 deaths registered during the previous 24 hour period.
Hundreds of Rohingya rescued by Bangladesh and sent to a flood-prone island after being stranded at sea for weeks should be moved to existing refugee camps, the UN secretary general has said. The appeal by Antonio Guterres to Bangladesh's foreign minister in a letter obtained Sunday by AFP comes as concern grows over a coronavirus outbreak in the sprawling camps near the border with Myanmar. A fourth virus case has been detected in the crowded camps, officials said Sunday.
The World Health Organization (WHO) is to raise the question of Taiwan's participation as an observer at the World Health Assembly, which opens virtually on Monday, before one of its committees. Diplomatic allies of Taiwan, including Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Paraguay, have formally requested to invite Taiwan to the meeting as an observer. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, has also said publicly he wants Taiwan in the room.
India has extended its lockdown to 31 May, but with some easing of restrictions. States are being given greater power to reopen markets and standalone stores, bus and other public transport travel being allowed between and within states. However, shopping malls, air travel, cinemas, schools and places of worship will remain closed. Mumbai, New Delhi, Chennai and other key regions are still fighting to control the rising curve of coronavirus infections. The health ministry on Sunday reported a record jump of nearly 5,000 cases of Covid-19 in the past 24 hours, raising the number of confirmed cases to 90,927, with 2,872 deaths.