The week in TV: Hospital; I Know This Much Is True; Dave; State of Happiness, and more
Hospital's two-night coronavirus special will stand as a vital chronicle of our times. Plus, a doubly brilliant Mark Ruffalo, a cringe-worthy US rap comedy – and the joys of 70s Stavanger
"It's like building the plane while we're in the air." So said Rachel Anticoni, who happened to be director of operations of London's Royal Free hospital but could have been any one of the legion of struggling professionals coping as Covid-19 wriggled through their battlements, one weaselly, unconscionable cough at a time. One of the most telling things about the astonishing two nights of Hospital: Coronavirus Special was that barroom philosophers – remember them? – might have to cut back on their instant solutions: our NHS administrators were on this evidence every bit as harried, fraught and dedicated, with muck-sweats and trembles and slept-in hair, as the lads and lasses in the gowns.
Not only building the plane, but having to invent cockpit radio and an air traffic control system while wildly hoping, somehow, that those on the ground were in step with some of their thoughts, or at least not using Betamax or Windows 10. We saw how the trickle became a flood – four chairs set aside for cases, then eight, and by the end of Monday night's outing four entire floors were quarantined, and the basement morgue beginning to overflow, and concrete being poured for new tanks to store frozen oxygen, some patients needing 15 litres of pure every minute.
The Hospital series has always been about access, and for this special – filmed from the very first evening of lockdown, almost until peak nasty in the week around Easter – the levels granted were phenomenal in the circumstances: one got the distinct feeling that camera and sound operators were almost accepted as onside friends on the same parapet. Reality cannot perforce be scripted: the editing has to do the dramatic work of a script, and thus I wondered slightly whether the individual stories selected for transmission didn't skew us, if even very slightly, towards the happier outcomes. I think, overall, the makers balanced any requirement for drama with fairness to the statistics; for every Peter, going home joyous at 88 despite being touch-and-go throughout, there was a Stanley, kind soft eyes shining so hard when first told one morning his breathing had settled, yet so suddenly, on the spiral down. We even got a little backstory: Peter, far from being any anonymous geezer-statistic, had invented the mint chocolate liqueur! Had I had any alcoholic After Eight in the house, and more importantly been able to find my way to a cupboard through the litter of crumpled Kleenex, I would have raised a glass to him.
An absolute standout chronicle of our times, sure to be looked back on with something approaching awe, and if nothing else it reminded us of the sheer inventiveness and adaptability of the human animal – and reminded us too of the true meaning of the word "unprecedented", rather than its devalued employment to describe having to talk to your family or wipe your nethers with kitchen roll.
We were a little short on wildly light relief this week, unless you count sudden blithering governmental mismanagement as a kind of kooky black comedy ("the team takes a nation's six weeks of vaulting goodwill in a crisis and wilfully decides to spin mixed messages… with hilarious consequences…"). I Know This Much Is True is a dour, bleak, harrowing adaptation of a dour, bleak etc novel, which showcases Mark Ruffalo, playing twins, one of whom is schizophrenic. It is more than saved from just being a vehicle for awards for Ruffalo – playing twins, so versatile! Mental illness, a shoo-in! – by being magnificently shot, and paced, amid the bony trees of Connecticut, and by Ruffalo being in fact a remarkably fine actor, and by featuring, amid all the cancer and hand-amputation and police violence, an intriguing Italian grandfather's manuscript and Juliette Lewis as the sexiest fruit-loop of an academic translator one might ever encounter, never mind in Connecticut. It is honestly, if slowly and grimly, beautiful and moreish.
Dave, which started with a doubler last Sunday night and is all about a privileged white wannabe rapper, is actually genuinely funny at many stages, though the humour too often centres on cringing at gaucheness or, more simplistically, penis gags. Ho ho. Dave Burd, the star and creator, who raps in real life under the moniker Lil Dicky, plays a version of himself, which gets me a little fed up, it all having been done in Seinfeld, but also, I'm getting a twitch fed up with grown men acting as tall toddlers, balls having dropped at least 15 years since yet still utterly unable to cope with women with brains. It is almost rescued by Burd's winning empathy towards both rich and poor, white and black. But that's a rather big "almost".
The Norwegian drama State of Happiness has been a wonderful find, as has its star Anne Regine Ellingsaeter. It's been gripping some of us over the last few Saturdays, and telling the tale of how sleepy little fish-smelly happy-clappy Stavanger, with its cød and its gød, became Norway's oil capital during the 60s and early 70s, and transformed.
By focusing on three or four families, the makers have done a wise thing: portrayed, distilled and lucidly, the great changes then afoot. More crucially, they have given us a Scandi tale that did not open with a spreadeagled body, but a spreadsheet. The political misunderstandings between US oil companies, rampant in their belief that "socialism" meant Mao, and Norway, who thought it might better mean "sharing, nicely", are writ large, and young Anna, the sharp-as-a-tack typist played by Ellingsaeter and patronised by all, simply cleans up.
It features wonderful old semi-modern phones, and technology, and motels, and attitudes. It shows how, but for oil, Norway, with its mutton farms and Jesus-love, might have taken a very different back route to the 21st century, almost up there with Albania.
The remake of Van Der Valk is dire. A happy weeknight with a lengthy criminal thriller… I was thinking with glee of Endeavour, Lewis, Vera, and yet, despite having valked all three Van Der Valks, I just could not be troubled to keep up with any so-called plot, especially a two-hour 70s remake, notable in its first iteration only for its theme tune and for its being set in wow-that's-foreign! Amsterdam. I rewound, constantly, never a good sign, and muttered about tattoos and nuns and shitty shoddy writing, and the fact that VDV seems to have taken an entirely spurious dislike, for no discernible reason, to the bright spark in the pack. For evidence of Marc Warren's undoubted acting chops, see Flack, still the most underrated comedy-drama languishing on the W channel: but VDV is awful in that it combines loss of time with immense boredom. Similarly, Code 404 – a policeman has been rebuilt after his death, but as a slapsticky cretin – in which Daniel Mays and Stephen Graham do not have even a premise, unless it's that of proving how even charmingly great actors, without a script, are reduced to just making noises with their mouths.