Coronavirus 16 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University at least 4,542,752 people are known to have been infected and 307,696 people have died worldwide since the pandemic began. The figures are likely to represent a significant underestimate of the true scale of the pandemic.
The US House of Representatives has narrowly approved a $3tn bill crafted by Democrats to provide more aid for battling the coronavirus and stimulating a faltering economy. But Republican leaders, who control the Senate, and Donald Trump have vowed to block it, despite some Republican support for provisions aimed at helping state and local governments.
Donald Trump has announced details of a "warp-speed" effort to create a coronavirus vaccine by the end of the year, even as experts warn that such a breakthrough could take longer than 18 months. During remarks in the White House Rose Garden on Friday that had to compete with honking from protesting truck drivers, the US president also urged schools to reopen in the autumn and insisted: "Vaccine or no vaccine, we're back."
As Mexico moves toward a gradual reactivation of its economy from Monday, the number of new coronavirus infections grows higher every day, raising fears of a new wave of infections that other countries have seen after loosening restrictions, AP reports. There were 2,437 new coronavirus test confirmations Friday, the highest daily total yet and the second straight day with over 2,000 new cases.
Donald Trump's administration is set to restore partial funding to the World Health Organization, Fox News reported late on Friday, citing a draft letter. The Trump administration will "agree to pay up to what China pays in assessed contributions" to the WHO, Fox News reported, quoting from the letter. Trump suspended US contributions to the WHO on 14 April, accusing it of promoting China's "disinformation" about the coronavirus outbreak.
Italy's government has approved a decree allowing travel to and from abroad from 3 June, moving to unwind one of the world's most rigid coronavirus lockdowns. The government will allow free travel across the country from that same day. Some regions had pushed for a swifter rollback but the prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, has insisted on a gradual return to normal to prevent a second wave of infections.