Coronavirus 30 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
With the latest tally, India has reported 173,763 coronavirus cases and 4,971 deaths, making it the ninth most-affected country globally, according to Reuters. While the fatality rates in India have been lower than in worse-hit countries, experts fear the peak has not been reached. The latest numbers, showing mounting cases of new infections, would appear to confirm that grim prediction.
The global death toll has increased to 365,368, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University, which has tracked the spread of the virus during the pandemic. The number of cases currently stands at 5,945,737. The true number of infections is likely to be much higher, however, given the vast number of unrecorded and asymptomatic cases.
The president of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, said mosques are to resume daily prayers throughout the country, despite some areas reporting continuing high levels of coronavirus infections. He added that physical distancing and other health protocols would be observed in mosques. He did not say when they were due to reopen.
A UK government adviser has warned that it is too early to lift lockdown restrictions as planned next month, because the number of new infections is still too high. John Edmunds, a professor of infectious disease modelling at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said he wanted the level of new cases to be "driven down further" before larger gatherings are allowed. Edmunds is one of several experts to suggest this weekend that lockdown is being eased too quickly.
Australian experts have joined their counterparts in the UK and around the world in voicing their support for the World Health Organization after the US president, Donald Trump, said Washington would sever ties with the global body. Prof Peter Doherty, a Nobel laureate and patron of the Doherty Institute, which is part of global efforts to find a Covid-19 vaccine, said the WHO had the "full support of the scientific community".
The US supreme court has rejected a challenge by a church group to block California's lockdown laws, which limit attendance at religious worship to 25% of building capacity or 100 people, whichever is lower. In the California dispute, the nine justices split 5-4 in rejecting a bid by South Bay United Pentecostal church in Chula Vista to block the rules issued by governor Gavin Newsom, a Democrat. Conservative chief justice John Roberts joined the court's four liberal justices in the majority.
Germany and the European Commission have reached agreement on a Berlin-funded €9bn (£8.1bn) rescue plan for the airline Lufthansa, which has suffered badly during the pandemic. Since the crisis hit Europe, the Lufthansa group – which also includes Brussels Airlines, Austrian Airlines and Swiss Air – has been bleeding €1m an hour, with about 90% of its 760 aircraft grounded. The deal would see the German carrier give up eight planes and their associated landing rights.