A dedicated nurse, a party-loving patient transporter
We are documenting the lives of every US medical worker who dies helping patients during the pandemic. These are just a few of hundreds of cases
Lost on the frontline is a collaboration between the Guardian and Kaiser Health News that aims to document the lives of healthcare workers in the US who die from Covid-19, and to understand why so many are falling victim to the pandemic.
Each week, we're documenting new cases of healthcare workers who have died on the frontlines of the coronavirus pandemic. Here are their stories:
Occupation: Emergency room nursePlace of work: New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University medical center in New York CityDate of death: 24 April 2020
Joy and Romeo Agtarap met in Queens in the 1980s, when they were both young nurses, newly arrived from the Philippines. Joy Agtarap said her husband was a jokester who had a vibrant personality that often made him the life of the party. At gatherings, he liked to get people on to the dance floor.
"He's a very good dancer – sometimes he made the line dances too hard and people would get lost!" she remembered.
He was also a dedicated emergency room nurse. Agtarap had spent 20 years at what his wife said was his "dream job" at the New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University medical center.
"Working there was the proudest accomplishment of his life," she said. He was still seeing patients when the pandemic hit.(The hospital did not respond to requests to comment on whether he had adequate personal protective equipment).
Romeo was diagnosed with Covid-19 in late March. Joy, who had left nursing due to an injury, became sick a week later. They were both hospitalized – he at New York-Presbyterian and she at a facility on Long Island. As Joy recovered, she anxiously awaited updates on her husband's condition.
"It was the most devastating thing that's ever happened to me. I was going crazy in there waiting for calls about him," she said. He died on 24 April. "I believe he took the worst of the virus for me, that's why I'm still here," she said.
– Anna Jean Kaiser
Occupation: Security guardPlace of work: Kingsbrook Jewish medical center in Brooklyn, New YorkDate of death: 5 April 2020
When Griselda Bubb-Johnson couldn't reach her friend Marva – hospitalized with Covid-19 – she called her son, Adiel Montgomery.
Montgomery, a security guard in the hospital's emergency department, found his mother's friend in the ICU. He then did "everything for her", Bubb-Johnson said. When Marva was cold, he got a blanket. When she was hungry, he got food. When her phone died, he found a charger.
"Some people boast about their children, but I didn't have to," Bubb-Johnson said, "because everybody knew you could count on Adiel for anything."
Montgomery doted on residents as a part-time supervisor at the Urban Resource Institute, a domestic violence shelter. He invited his godbrothers to her home for Golden State Warriors games, Thanksgiving and sometimes for his mom's renowned oxtail stew.
Two weeks after Montgomery noted he couldn't taste his lunch, he experienced acute chest pain. When, after 12 hours in the ER, his heart stopped "nobody could believe it," Bubb-Johnson said.
Montgomery had been vocal about a lack of personal protective equipment for hospital security guards, according to a New York Times report. The hospital did not respond to requests for comment.
Montgomery's 14-year-old daughter, Aaliyah, never got to say goodbye. She wrote a poem to put in the coffin.
"Don't worry," Bubb-Johnson told her. "He'll read it. I promise."
– Eli Cahan
Occupation: Traveling registered nursePlace of work: Lakeside Health &amp; Wellness Suites in Reno, Nevada, via MAS Medical StaffingDate of death: 19 April 2020
David Joel Perea would call in from Maine, Vermont, Minnesota and, ultimately, Nevada, with the same request: "Mom, can you send tamales?" Dominga Perea would ship them overnight. This is how she always knew where her son was.
A traveling nurse who routinely pulled 80-hour weeks, David "had a tremendous work ethic", said his brother, Daniel Perea. A young David, returning from his father's mechanic shop, said, "I don't want to spend life sweating under a car," Dominga recalled. "I want to be somebody."
Dominga was proud of him, "for doing God's work".
When "mijito" didn't respond to her text on 6 April, Dominga knew something was wrong. "I could always tell how David was. If he said, 'Hi, Mama,' he was happy. If he said, 'I'm fine, Mom,' he was tired," she said.
This time he said neither. "Don't panic, Mama," David wrote. "Just pray for me. I have the Covid."
David FaceTimed with his mother on Easter Sunday from a hospital bed in Reno. "He was starving, but he struggled even eating mashed potatoes," Dominga said, "because he couldn't breathe." The next morning, he was placed on a ventilator and never woke up.
"We are deeply saddened by the death of any residents or staff that have passed away during this pandemicand offer our deepest sympathies to their families," Lakeside, his final worksite, commented through a spokesman, "we have worked … to implement the most up-to-date infection control protocols to prevent further spread of Covid-19 in our facility."
– EC
Occupation: Licensed practical nursePlace of work: Northport VA medical center's Valley Stream clinic in Valley Stream, New YorkDate of death: 15 April 2020
When Christopher Dean went to the emergency room, he was "absolutely positive" he would only be hospitalized for a few days.
"He was always optimistic, full of life," said Natalya Kubaevskaya, his wife. "And he had a big heart."
When tests came back positive for Covid-19, he planned to help fight the disease by donating blood and plasma as soon as he recovered.
Dean had mild asthma, his wife said, but was otherwise healthy. He loved snowboarding, swimming and racquetball.
Christopher's father, Alvin, wrote on a GoFundMe page that he contracted the coronavirus at work. A representative of Northport wrote that the clinicprovided "PPE in accordance with CDC guidelines".
Kubaevskaya, who recently finished treatment for breast cancer, said Dean pushed her to keep going. She said their daughter, Donna, 15, struggles with her adoptive father's death. "There are moments," Kubaevskaya said, "when she tries to convince herself that he's still in the hospital and will come home soon."
– Katja Ridderbusch
Occupation: Licensed practical nursePlace of work: Amsterdam nursing home in New York CityDate of death: 30 March 2020
Faith was central to Hazel Mijares' life.
A lay leader at her Methodist church in New Jersey, Mijares taught Bible study classes, sang in the choir, and sometimes gave the sermon.
She was drawn to church as a child in the Philippines, her sister Hannilette Huelgas said. One of nine children,Mijares always led the family prayers.
Mijares, who had worked for years at the nursing home, planned to retire in March. She worked through 13 March, burned up accrued paid time off, then stopped back a week later for her last day. As she said her goodbyes, she noticed a little cough.
After she learned that one of her patients had died of Covid-19, Mijares tried several times to get tested. Amid delays, her health deteriorated. When Huelgas called on 30 March, Mijares didn't answer. She had died waiting for her test results, which the family learned were positive.
As of 24 May, the nursing home had recorded 45 presumed-Covid-19 deaths. Officials there did not respond to requests for comment, but a phone recording updated on 21 May said they had "completed Covid-19 testing of residents" and had "begun testing of all staff".
Mijares "had wanted to go to Jerusalem, to the Philippines", Huelgas said. "And she didn't even get to enjoy retirement."
– Maureen O'Hagan
Occupation: Patient transport workerPlace of work: Swedish hospital in Chicago, IllinoisDate of death: 6 May 2020
Caring, upbeat, always first to arrive at a party. Gabrail Ismayl loved an excuse to don a suit and splash on cologne.
That's how Fidelline Youhanna remembers her uncle. "Everybody loved Gaby," she said.
After immigrating from Syria in the 1980s, Ismayl ran wholesale clothing shops on Chicago's North Side. He was a whiz with the sewing machine and enjoyed altering dresses, making curtains and designing gifts for family and friends.
Always outgoing, he later found work as a hospital orderly, wheeling patients where they needed to go.
As the pandemic took hold, Ismayl worked despite health conditions that elevated his risk, Youhanna said.
"I think he just liked his job," she said. "He made a lot of friends there."
Ismayl became sick in April and self-isolated in the basement of the home he shared with two of his sisters. On 6 May, his condition worsened, Youhanna said. By evening, he was dead.
Ismayl was employed by the management services company Sodexo. A spokesperson for the company said they mourned his death but would not comment on whether he may have contracted the disease at work.
– Mary Chris Jaklevic
Age: 60Occupation: Surgical technicianPlace of Work: University of Illinois hospital in Chicago, IllinoisDate of Death: 27 April 2020
It was easy to befriend Juan Martinez.
The surgical technician "could start a conversation up with anyone about anything", said Jose Moreno, an operating room nurse and co-worker.
He went out of his way to teach others what he had learned from 34 years in the field, said his son, Juan Martinez Jr. Juan Jr followed his father's career path at the same hospital. A military veteran and former pastor, Martinez set an example "to be faithful to your job", his son said.
Set to retire at the end of April, Martinez anticipated spending time with his grandchildren, traveling and opening Bible education centers in Mexico, his family said. On 17 April, feeling tired and feverish, he was hospitalized. He tested positive for Covid-19.
Family members said Martinez did not engage in direct patient care but came in contact with staffers who did. In a statement, a hospital representative said that it "provided guidance to use personal protective equipment as recommended by the CDC and in some cases we have implemented recommendations that go beyond the CDC guidelines".
Juan Jr said that losing his dad has been a nightmare and that he and his two siblings are "leaning on the Lord and praying a lot, just like how our father taught us".
– MCJ
Occupation: Registered nursePlace of work: University of Illinois hospital in Chicago, IllinoisDate of death: 4 May 2020
"What lady? I don't see a lady here."
That was the sort of self-deprecating comment Maria E Lopez would fire back when teased by a co-worker about an etiquette faux pas in the operating room.
Lopez knew how to break the tension, said chief nurse anesthetist Mary Ann Zervakis Brent. Lopez called everyone amigo or amiga, regardless of rank.
"She just made everything fun," Zervakis Brent said.
Lopez was an expert in robotic surgery and trained others to use the equipment.
She taught her two daughters to be independent. The oldest of nine children, Lopez defied her father's expectation that she forgo college, said one of her daughters, who is also named Maria Lopez.
Lopez's symptoms appeared days after she returned to work from leave for knee surgery. She planned to retire on 30 April.
In the hospital, Lopez tried to stay positive. Yet during one FaceTime call, her daughter said, "She just broke down. She said, 'I wouldn't want anyone I love going through what I'm going through right now.'"
"A hospital official confirmed that Lopez was one of three employees who died of complications of Covid-19.The hospital said it gave staff guidance to use PPE "as recommended by the CDC" andimplemented universal masking for patients and staff on 27 March. It also said it has made available particle-filtering masks to staff.
– MCJ