Last orders: London drinkers resigned to tier 3 restrictions
People out socialising before new rules kick in believe they are inevitable but say 'we need to rethink the whole thing'
A subdued, frustrated, yet resigned atmosphere permeated Shoreditch, east London, on Tuesday night as afterwork punters savoured their final evening before the capital entered the most restrictive tier of coronavirus rules at short notice.
"The government seems to have a really antiquated view of going out drinking and hospitality," said Alex Irving, who works in PR, sat outside Ever After, a bar on Hoxton Square, following an announcement in the Commons less than 24 hours earlier that would force bars and restaurants to close from midnight.
"It just seems like such a waste," added her colleague Ellie Camm, perched alongside another four co-workers. "The industry has gone to so much effort to make sure things are safe for people at this time of year."
Think about the lengths someone out drinking has to go through, Irving added, "versus being in Tesco, in a queue … We're here sitting outside, if we have to go inside we'll wear a mask, all the seats and tables are apart, and they check if you live or work together."
Of bars and restaurants serving alcohol, she said: "There's always someone sober that's controlling as people get more drunk to stop them from doing what they shouldn't be doing. At the end of the day, with the amount of people having parties in their own house, I just think it's really silly."
The group had been forced to bring forward their company's Christmas bash after stricter rules were imposed on the south-east and London on Monday amid concern over steeply rising cases and the identification of a new Covid-19 variant, and it was a more modest affair for the public relations experts than last year's glamorous event in Amsterdam.
However, due to the sudden announcement, many appeared not to have had the time to reschedule yuletide events to Tuesday. "They didn't really give enough notice, last time it was in like five, six days' time, but now, one day notice, I don't think anyone's ready," said Natasha Hussain, who works at a pub on Columbia Road.
"There's so much yo-yo, we've only been open for two weeks, it would have just made more sense to stay closed."
But despite the muted streets and befuddlement over the logic of the government's decisions, people seemed just glad to be able to have a last night together as the skies remained clear despite the chill.
"We're going to eat a lot of food before it all shuts down for the foreseeable future," said Stanley Lucas, a student at University of the Arts London. "And get drunk" added one of his companions, Julia de Vries, echoing Lucas's frustrations about needing to self-isolate upon return home to their families.
Fellow student Caleb Bell said he believed the imposition of stricter rules had been inevitable. "They've been demonising the north for so long, and kept them in tier 3, whereas London's figures have actually been higher than parts of the north. But they've probably been trying to keep us out for economic reasons."
Back at Ever After, as it emerged that an official review was taking place into rules allowing families to meet over Christmas, Leigh Carrick-Moore, a tech recruitment company chief executive, wished the government could encourage venues to take a more imaginative approach.
"I want the hospitality industry to survive. Right there, we've got a square, and pavements, we could have more tables and outside heaters," she said, referencing similar measures in New York.
"I'm paranoid about the virus, but it's so safe outside. We need to rethink and reimagine the whole thing."