This Christmas, please thank a headteacher for the miracles they have achieved
From Zoom nativity plays to delivering track and trace, it has been the most stressful school term ever
And lo, at the end of an exhausting term, Joseph did knock upon the door of the inn. Only to be told, in the loudest voice a seven-year-old can muster: "Sorry, you can't come in, the government have ordered us to close. It's tier 3 round here."
Christmas performances are something that in normal times schools just have to do. They are time-consuming, unpredictable, and do always end in tears, but teachers dutifully persist on the grounds that children deserve the experience of being on stage and parents love the emotional hit of watching them.
But of course Covid, the great ruiner, has made it all so hard this year. Crowding kids from several classes into an ensemble of angels is a no-no. Audiences must not gather. Unsurprisingly, half of schools have decided the show must not go on.
But the other half are having a new awakening. Introducing: the virtual nativity! Using the same ingenuity through which schools this year pivoted to food delivery and being a more reliable contact track-and-trace service than the government's dodgy app, teachers have found ways to record and broadcast the Christmas story.
At Grasmere primary school in Cumbria, more than 70 children took to the fells to work with film-makers to create a beautiful video that as well as being shared with grandparents, will be shown in hospitals and care homes. As Hope, one of the girls involved in the film, said: "It was exciting and nerve-racking because we didn't know how it would turn out." After a pause, she beams: "But it turned out good!"
Like many aspects of our new world, there are advantages to this approach. Working parents often struggle to get to live nativity performances, sometimes causing a lifetime of guilt. And in nativity Zoom, parents don't scuffle in the audience, nor are there rows over the number of tickets a family may have.
If you're now feeling hard done by because your child's school didn't hold a nativity at all, please don't. There will have been solid reasons for their decision – worries about staff safety and exhaustion. The current stresses on headteachers are unprecedented. The survey project I co-founded, Teacher Tapp, has been checking fortnightly anxiety among teachers since 2019, and scores for school leaders have been through the roof since March. For the term to end with the government announcing it expected headteachers to deliver track and trace from school right up until Christmas Eve was a final, crass, kick in the face. School leaders are awake all night with the burden of their current responsibilities.
So, let me ask a favour. Please say thank you to your local headteachers. Genuinely, say or write it. Nothing elaborate is needed: heads rarely want gifts, or even public praise. But, like everyone, they appreciate a thoughtful thank you card or a heartfelt word at the school gate. Among all the craziness it helps to know that some of it is making a difference, and it mitigates against the cries from parents who are quick to complain when they feel wronged by a decision.
The moral of the nativity is that even when things seem bleak, with generosity and a bit of ingenuity, miracles can still happen. Schools have proven that time and again this year. Thank yous won't make up for the incompetent and inconsiderate way the government has acted towards schools this year, but it might just help a little.