Promise of UK care home visits is not being kept to, warns charity
Concerns over rapid-results Covid tests plus insurance issues mean many residents will remain isolated over Christmas
Care homes are not honouring government calls for families to be reunited with loved ones in time for Christmas, according to a leading charity.
Progress on enabling visits has stalled, with some care homes worried about insurance issues and concerns about the accuracy of rapid-result Covid tests, Age UK has said.
The government pledged on 1 December that care home residents in all tiers would have the opportunity to receive visits before Christmas. In-person visits should be the norm, it said, unless a home has had an outbreak.
The government pledge came as more than a million rapid-result lateral flow tests were distributed to England's 385 biggest care homes.
But no detail has yet emerged on when smaller homes will receive them. With two weeks to go until Christmas, Age UK said these visits would not be a reality "unless something changes fast".
"As one barrier is overcome another always seems to take its place, whether it's the pronounced risk aversion of some care home chains and their insurers, or a lack of confidence in lateral flow tests among some local authorities," said Age UK's charity director Caroline Abrahams.
Judy Downey, chair of the Relatives &amp; Residents Association, said the overwhelming majority of calls to its helpline continue to be about banned or restricted visits.
"Government guidance seems to give people hope and then take it away," she said. "Families are in despair and watching parents and partners suffer depression and deterioration as they fail to understand why they continue to be punished in this way. What's happened to the consideration of the human rights of those at the end of their lives?"
Vic Rayner, executive director at the National Care Forum (NCF), said: "A properly resourced and communicated regime of testing must be able to commence in all homes across the country.
"Recent government guidance outlines just how detailed the process of administering lateral flow devices is and it is clear that it will require homes to dedicate large numbers of care hours to this approach."
Age UK surveyed 2,732 people it was already in contact with, and found that 70% had not been able to visit or see their loved one since the start of the pandemic.
A third said that they had been offered no alternative to in person visiting, such as a video-call, and shared feelings of guilt and despair. One survey respondent said: "I feel as though I have locked my parents away and thrown the key away."
Another respondent, 23, said: "My grandad was going to die, we knew that it was only a matter of time. But the fact that he might have died thinking we abandoned him kills all of my family. And it probably will do for the rest of our lives."
Councillor Ian Hudspeth, the chair of the Local Government Association's community wellbeing board, said: "Councils and care providers want to do all they can to ensure people can visit their loved ones in care homes and other care settings, safely and securely, without risk of passing on the virus.
"Families, residents and care staff all need to have full confidence in arrangements for testing [so] it is important for government to be open and transparent about the reliability and limitations of lateral flow tests, and the ability of care homes to implement these fully and safely as part of opening up visiting, in time for Christmas."