Lost your faith in humanity? Covid vaccine patient Martin Kenyon might restore it
The 91-year-old greeted his new, corona-repelling superpowers by complaining about his lunch and asking Piers Morgan who he was – and it was a delight to see
Along with humanity, the news channel CNN got incredibly lucky on the world's first day of the Covid vaccine: loitering outside Guy's hospital in central London, a reporter met Martin Kenyon, 91 years old, freshly minted with corona-repelling superpowers (pending the second dose, etc), extraordinarily charming.
Was it the incidental, quotidian detail (he'd had trouble parking, and had a nasty lunch); the careful precision of his language ("I have a family; it consists of daughters and grandchildren); the steadfast refusal to emote ("I don't feel about it at all") in the face of what was, in honesty, an overpoweringly emotional moment ("I hope I'm not going to have the bloody bug now")? Who knows, it could have been the way he pronounced off "orf", and made the whole segment sound like a how-to video for a spy in the first world war to infiltrate the British officer class. Or perhaps it was his steadfast intention to stay alive on the grounds that, once you've done that for 91 years, ceasing to do so would be pointless.
It kept getting better. The next day, Piers Morgan went to interview him outside his house, and Kenyon asked him who he was. The whole thing was an extremely enjoyable scene of national ambassadorship; a globe of CNN-viewers witnessing this stoical cheerfulness. Hopefully, they now think the British are all like that.
The best bit, though, was all the points he made just by existing: the clear human benefit of a public-health system where the only priority status you need to get a vaccination is being a person who needs it the most; the fact that right-thinking humans don't prowl around Facebook looking for conspiracy theories – they go out, have a prawn sandwich, then get a vaccine so they can hug the people they want to hug, and this makes them delighted. But they don't make a song and dance about it. These things are hard to say without getting into a fight, but very easy to believe when they're right there on the street wearing exquisite manners and a sleeveless jacket.