Children's social care has changed during Covid. That progress mustn't be lost now
For all its challenges, the pandemic has given the sector the chance to reset itself and change for the better
Over the past few months, I have been speaking to frontline children's social workers to understand how the coronavirus pandemic has affected them. My interviews fed into the Centre for Public Impact's report What does the Covid-19 crisis mean for the future of children's social care?
Like so many others working in public services, they have had to adapt to new ways of doing things practically overnight. But despite the rapid changes and constant difficulties they have faced, many insisted that there is no going back: they cannot return to pre-pandemic broken practices. Instead, everyone in the sector must urgently reset the profession and make relationships its primary focus.
During the first wave of the virus, the intensity for frontline children's social workers increased immeasurably. They faced an unprecedented, exhausting and supercharged challenge, with inordinately high stakes. Yet many also said that, because of the extreme circumstances, changes that were previously unthinkable happened incredibly quickly. Seismic shifts took place: visits were carried out over the phone, Ofsted inspections were suspended and many practitioners were given credit cards and authorised to buy families the essential items they needed. As one social worker told me, this meant that they were able to provide "what a lot of families actually need".
These changes might seem minor, but they can make a massive difference to people's lives. Moving from box-ticking to offering bespoke support boosted social workers' autonomy and confidence in their ability to support children and families. And crucially, it helped relationships – the backbone of children's social care – develop. During the first lockdown, social workers revealed that existing strong relationships flourished, aided by the sudden use of new technologies to communicate and a more flexible approach to working together.
But as the weeks rolled on, bureaucracy threatened to erode progress. Calls from the top for more paperwork increased because, as one social worker noted, bureaucracy is comforting for management in times of anxiety. But bureaucracy for bureaucracy's sake can't continue – it's in the health and social care secretary's firing line precisely because it blocks effective relationship building. When excess time is spent on endless administrative tasks, there is less to spend developing all-important human connections.
So where does this leave us? Children's social care is at an impasse. Many in leadership and management are trying to return to pre-lockdown practices, while many social workers clamour for the positive changes of the past few months to stick, so the profession can use this moment to tackle the systemic issues predating the pandemic.
We've tried to capture our conversations with social workers in the evidence given to the House of Lords' public services committee, building on our previous work with Buurtzorg and Frontline to devise a blueprint that shows a different way to deliver children's social care. And we're joining the many social workers calling for a move towards a system that prioritises relationships. This will require hard changes.
First, we need to change how we understand and manage risk. Each child, parent, and family is different. Rigid risk categorisations cannot capture the complex reality of life, and only serve to make management feel in control. Instead, risk assessment should be flexible and dynamic, tailored to family needs, and practitioner-led.
Second, social work cannot exist in isolation. Practitioners report increased, beneficial interactions with schools and community organisations, who stepped up during the pandemic to support vulnerable children. But referrals between April and June fell by 18%, which shows the importance of schools in both helping to support and identify those at risk. At the very least, enhanced relationships between schools and practitioners must continue.
Finally, social workers' voices must be heard. They know the problems that families face and the gaps in support provision. Their wellbeing – so instrumental to quality support for vulnerable children and families – must be higher on the agenda.
This is not an exhaustive list of recommendations, nor is our blueprint the only way in which local authorities can attend to the urgent need to reshape children's social care. What is clear is that we cannot and should not go back to the way things were. Local authorities and government have an urgent responsibility to listen to the voices on the frontline, and find ways to make the positive changes of the past few months permanent.
Katie Rose is a senior manager at the Centre for Public Impact