North-west England has highest proportion of people shielding from Covid
Regional divide puts pressure on some of the councils hardest hit by austerity, research finds
People in the north-west of England are disproportionately likely to be classed as "extremely clinically vulnerable", exposing a north-south divide in the government's shielding policy, and putting pressure on some of the local authorities hardest hit by austerity, research has found.
The north-west of England has the highest proportion of residents on the NHS shielding list (4.8%), followed by the north-east (4.6%), compared with 3.6% in London and the south-east, 3.9% in the south-west and 3.5% in the West Midlands, according to analysis from the Health Foundation thinktank.
Liverpool has the highest proportion of shielders, with 9.3% of the city (46,440 people) identified as being at high risk of complications from coronavirus.
In the London boroughs of Tower Hamlets and Camden and the city of Oxford 2.5% of residents were being asked to shield, according to the Health Foundation analysis of the NHS shielding list at the end of October.
Those classed as extremely clinically vulnerable have been advised to stay at home and not go to work for most of the past nine months. They require extra support from local authorities, which have endured extreme spending cuts since 2010, the worst of which are in the poorest areas of northern England.
Research in 2019 found that while the people of Liverpool had shouldered the burden of the equivalent of an £816 per head fall in day-to-day public spending since 2010, in Oxford the figure went up by £115.
Of people living in the fifth most deprived local authorities, 4.2% have been asked to shield compared with just 3.5% in the least deprived areas. Not all of these are in the south of England: in Richmondshire, North Yorkshire, where the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is the local MP, 2.9% of residents (1,545 people) are on the shielding list.
The prevalence of long-term conditions, in particular respiratory conditions that put people at higher risk of serious illness from Covid-19, is higher in poorer areas. This may explain the variation seen in shielding across deprivation levels, the Health Foundation said.
Paul Brant, the cabinet member for public health at Liverpool city council, said: "Our numbers reflect the high levels of disease and disability that affects our population. Liverpool combines a history of high level so-called industrial diseases with higher levels of deprivation compared to other parts of the country.
"The stark facts are that almost half of our population have a long-term health condition, with a large proportion of those individuals having more than one health issue. We also have higher than average rates of COPD [chronic obstructive pulmonary disease] rates and high levels of cardiovascular diseases too.
"Covid has shone a massive spotlight on the huge inequalities that exist in our city and the desperate need for us to address the underlying causes of health inequalities and poverty."
There are now about 2.2 million people in England on the shielding list, equivalent to 3.9% of the population, and about 170,000 in Scotland, 80,000 in Northern Ireland and 133,000 in Wales.
In Wales and Northern Ireland, shielding rates were slightly higher than in England at 4.2%. However, the proportion asked to shield in Scotland was much lower, at only 3.3%.
More than a third (38%) of those identified as extremely clinically vulnerable have a respiratory condition, 17% a rare genetic, metabolic or autoimmune disease and 14% are being treated for cancer.
The majority of these conditions are chronic and require ongoing health and social care support. Any disruptions to care for this group are likely to have resulted in unmet need, with significant implications for their long-term health.
The Health Foundation's analysis of data from the Office for National Statistics shows that approximately one in three people (31%) who were shielding experienced a reduced level of care for their existing health conditions and one in 10 people did not access any care at all.
During the second lockdown local authorities received £14 per clinically extremely vulnerable person in their area to ensure they had access to essential supplies – a figure dismissed as too low by many council leaders, who say their finances are cut to the bone after 10 years of austerity.
Kathryn Dreyer, the interim assistant director of data analytics at the Health Foundation, said: "The cuts to public services and public health services in particular have disproportionately affected poorer areas. So from an inequalities point of view it's doubly concerning that there are potentially areas that have a large number of people who are shielding who are also experiencing the highest resource cuts."
Separate analysis from the IPPR North thinktank found that since 2014 the Midlands and North had endured the biggest cuts to public health budgets in England. Overall, England has had a cut of £13.20 per person, while the Midlands experienced a cut of £16.70 per person, and the north £15.20 per person. Within this area, the north-east was worst affected, with cuts of £23.24 per person.