Coronavirus: Kay Burley absent from show after admitting Covid rule breach
Sky News presenter blames need to 'spend a penny' for breaking regulations during 60th birthday party
The Sky News presenter Kay Burley did not present her breakfast show on Tuesday after being placed under review when she admitted to holding a 60th birthday party that broke Covid regulations.
Burley, who apologised over the incident and claimed she had only broken the rules because she needed to "spend a penny", went to the Century Club in Soho, London, on Saturday night in a group of 10 that included Sky colleagues Beth Rigby, Inzamam Rashid and Sam Washington.
The group sat at two tables, of six and four, before going on to a nearby restaurant, Folie. A smaller group of four then returned to Burley's home to continue the celebrations.
All of the Sky staff are facing a review of their conduct by their employer, which said it was "disappointed" by the incident.
Burley's usual 7am breakfast programme was presented from Coventry University hospital on Tuesday by Sarah Hewson. Burley is understood to have already been in the city, where the UK's first vaccine dose was administered, when the decision was made. There was no mention of the reason for Burley's absence when the show began.
On Monday evening, after the Guido Fawkes website published the story, Burley – who has held a series of politicians' feet to the fire over lockdown rules this year – admitted to breaking tier 2 restrictions, tweeting: "I want to apologise to you all for an error of judgment. On Saturday night I was enjoying my 60th birthday at a Covid-compliant restaurant. I am embarrassed to say that later in the evening I inadvertently broke the rules.
"I had been waiting for a taxi at 11pm to get home. Desperate for the loo, I briefly popped into another restaurant to spend a penny. I can only apologise."
Burley is understood to have blamed the situation on misunderstandings in planning and organising the event. But she did not address why a group of four people, including Rashid and former Sky News royal correspondent and Huawei PR executive Paul Harrison, returned to her home after the dinner, a claim that is not believed to be in dispute. Other Sky News staff are understood to be irritated by details of the event.
Under the tier 2 restrictions in London, indoor social gatherings of any kind are barred except among those who live together or have formed a support bubble. Groups of up to six can socialise outdoors. Police can impose fines of £200 for a first-time breach.
Under the rules, Burley's initial gathering would only have been allowed if the two tables remained separate throughout and sat outside. It is not clear how many of the group went to the second venue, but Burley's tweets suggested that the rules were broken during this part of the evening. A group of four gathering at her home would be against the rules unless they remained outside throughout.
Burley has been a stern interrogator of politicians who have been perceived as making excuses over lockdown breaches this year.
In May, she conducted a widely shared interview with the cabinet minister Michael Gove about the Dominic Cummings affair, repeatedly asking him to clarify what the government advice would be for a member of the public "struggling with Covid-19 and you think you've got a problem with your eyesight", in reference to Cummings' explanation of his trip to Barnard Castle.
She also interviewed the health secretary, Matt Hancock, after Prof Neil Ferguson was forced to resign as a government adviser and asked: "What did you think when you read it? Did you bang your head on the desk?"
A Sky News spokesperson said: "We place the highest importance on complying with the government guidelines on Covid, and we expect all our people to comply.
"We were disappointed to learn that a small number of Sky News staff may have engaged in activity that breached the guidelines. Although this took place at a social event in personal time, we expect all our people to follow the rules that are in place for everyone. An internal process is under way to review the conduct of the people involved."