The Ballad of Corona V review – promenade through the pandemic
The Big House, LondonA mixture of surrealism and satire renders Maggie Norris's production both unnerving and puzzling
Covid-19 dramas have kept us afloat during lockdown. There have been online monologues and TV plays on pandemic life while James Graham and David Hare have given us their takes, too. A play that reflects on the experience of the coronavirus crisis at this juncture, when the end is in sight, runs the risk of feeling retrospective.
The Ballad of Corona V takes us through the full cycle of the pandemic in Britain, from the disbelief and denial at its start to the hospital death toll at its apex and the political messaging alongside it. But it is lifted out of a socially-realist setting and infused with black comedy and song. It is the unusual mixture of surrealism and satire that renders it both unnerving and funny in its best moments.
Performed as promenade theatre inside The Big House, in London, we are taken on a circuit around six spaces, in small groups, and sometimes watch a scene unfolding on our feet. It is a resourceful and unobtrusive way of creating socially-distanced theatre and it feels intimate, too.
Directed by Maggie Norris, each scene enacts a seemingly discrete scenario – a new year celebration at the start of 2020 which turns into a scene of a mother in labour to mark the pandemic's start; a meeting between a black drug dealer and a guilt-ridden white woman who speaks in trendy hashtags and advertising slogans about the Black Lives Matter movement; a Covid-19 hospital ward with an exploding patient and an ailing Boris Johnson. The scenes slowly join up, characters and stories subtly connecting across the rooms, to give the production a sense of a deeper, overarching meaning, though it is not clear what that is.
Some of it feels akin to drifting through a dream – or nightmare – in which the everyday meets the surreal, where the virus manifests as a lone cowboy who might have strayed off the set of a spaghetti western and topical conversation on Grenfell and Brexit is spoken by characters in 19th century costumes. Sometimes it flies, other times it leaves us puzzled, though David Watson's script should be commended for its audacity, originality and some moments of brilliance.
The predominantly young cast is excellent. There is music by Jammz and a high point comes in the song, Panic Buy Dance (with lyrics by Jammz, Watson, Taurean Steele and Peter Davidson) in which actors sing a satirical rap about panic shopping as the nation battens down the hatches at the start of the crisis.
The villain of the piece – the virus itself – is charismatically played by Stephan Wolf-Schönburg and Steele. James Hogarth's impersonation of Johnson is delightful in its satire and has all the comic bathos of a prime minister appearing in slippers and bathrobe in a hospital ward to give his stuttering statements, which seem more concerned with oratory and PR than saving lives.
Does it hit as hard now as it would have done a month ago in its original aborted run, when we did not have a vaccine? There are fleeting glimpses of toilet rolls and Joe Wicks workouts, but they are far in the backdrop, and the play's bigger imagination makes much of its recently-lived, all too familiar subject matter, feel new.
At the Big House, London, until 22 December.