Damon Albarn: UK Covid response shows 'no empathy with arts'
Blur frontman hits out at government and calls for music to be considered in official plans
Damon Albarn has hit out at the government, saying its response to the coronavirus pandemic shows "no empathy with the arts whatsoever".
The Blur frontman and musical brains behind Gorillaz called for music to be made part of the prescription for the country's health.
Speaking before a series of virtual Gorillaz gigs, Albarn criticised the government for its focus on football and commerce as opposed to the arts.
He said: "This present government has no empathy with the arts whatsoever and sadly that is a really important part of British culture. It is an essential part of British culture.
"We live in a pretty fucking miserable country at times and we need our arts to uplift us. It should be part of the prescription for our national health.
"Maybe a little less emphasis on the Premier League just running and a bit more love given to the arts would be a start because, I'm sorry, I love football as much as anybody else, but football alone does not sustain my soul."
Albarn spoke from a chain hotel in London, where he and his crew have formed a bubble to rehearse before three online concerts in December.
The musician, who has repeatedly spoken out against Brexit, attacked the Conservative government over its treatment of the north of England during the pandemic.
"Who on Earth would leave the EU after what has happened this year? It's madness. No one would do that in their right mind, would they? But we are doing it," he said.
"It's gone beyond being angry about it. It's just 'OK, all right then'."
He welcomed the news that the UK had approved the Covid-19 vaccine from Pfizer and BioNTech as a step in the right direction for the arts sector.
He said the announcement was like "the beginning of crawling out of the pit". "I think they will have to have one of the other vaccines up and running for it to become more a realistic proposition for everybody," he said.
"But in a bleak landscape it is definitely a beacon of unbridled joy and hope."