The plight of pubs now facing last orders
Readers on the challenges faced by publicans, restarting businesses, the need for more support in Wales and the importance of Scotch eggs
John Harris fails to acknowledge the significant changes that I have witnessed as a pub regular for the best part of 60 years (Britain's pubs: we'll soon see the value of them, but will it be too late?, 29 November). First, how multinational brewing companies have destroyed many pubs by closing local breweries and maximising profits through the aggressive marketing of high-priced lagers and tokenistic anodyne national "real ale" brands. Second, how the current operation of pub companies results in many publicans working for less than the minimum wage, leading to a high turnover of staff. Third, he doesn't refer to the good news – the rise in the popularity of local microbreweries with bars attached and the small but important increase in community owned pubs. In fact, in the 12 months up to March 2019, before the pandemic hit, the number of UK pubs actually increased by 320 to 39,145. Mike Stein Pudsey, West Yorkshire
What John Harris has observed is indeed sad, and many of us will regret the destruction of the pub industry. It is also grossly unfair on those who have worked hard to control their environment and provide a safe place to relax. Yet the assumption is that the reduction in inhibitions caused by alcohol is increasing the spread of Covid-19.
Yet, although unfortunate for the current vendor, there is a difference between a business closing and a bespoke premises changing its purpose. There will be plenty of people who will relish restarting a pub business, so what is really important is that there is legislation in place that ensures that pubs cannot be bought by property developers for the purpose of turning them into houses. Then we can keep our pubs. Adrian Thorpe Edinburgh
The news that Welsh pubs would be banned from serving alcohol was met with consternation from publicans and punters alike (Pubs in Wales to close by 6pm under new Covid restrictions, 30 November). Rightly so.
In an attempt to soften the blow, the first minister, Mark Drakeford, promised £340m in support. While the money might help to pay overheads, it will not change the grim financial reality for many businesses. With 72% of pubs and restaurants across the UK preparing to operate at a loss next year, these latest restrictions will make closures and job losses inevitable.
The plight of Wales's pubs also speaks to a deep-rooted cultural dimension. Half a pint while watching the rugby is not just the optimum way to spend a wintry Saturday afternoon, but a comforting ritual to many. Above all, pubs matter because of their roles as social hubs, providing friendship and community across generations and class. The Welsh government is trying its best, but unless more support is provided, it could be last orders for this beleaguered industry. Ioan Phillips Lambeth, London
It is rare for a government minister to talk sense, particularly about pubs, but George Eustice is right that a Scotch egg served at a table in a pub is a substantial meal (Scotch egg to the rescue: minister says it can be 'substantial meal', 30 November). My local in Tottenham has long served them, homemade and warm with pickles. Pickles are a key part of the meal, and indeed case law (Timmis v Millman 1965) refers specifically to pub meals that include "pickles and beetroot". If that puts the anti-pub brigade in a bit of a pickle, so be it. Keith Flett Tottenham, London