Fauci apologises after implied criticism of UK's 'rushed' Covid vaccine approval
Top US scientist says he did not mean to imply 'sloppiness', while EU defends slower approach
America's leading infectious diseases scientist, Anthony Fauci, has apologised for implying he thought Britain's drug regulator had rushed through its coronavirus vaccine approval, as European politicians defended the bloc's slower approach.
Fauci's comments came after the UK became the first western country to approve the Pfizer-BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine for general use, prompting scepticism among Britain's European neighbours and suggestions of politicisation.
The director of the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) told the BBC: "I have a great deal of confidence in what the UK does both scientifically and from a regulator standpoint.
"Our process is one that takes more time than it takes in the UK. And that's just the reality," he said, adding: "I did not mean to imply any sloppiness even though it came out that way."
Fauci had earlier described Britain's Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) as having run "around the corner of the marathon and joined it in the last mile" and "rushed through that approval".
Fauci later told the BBC he meant to convey that US and UK medical authorities did things differently but that did not necessarily mean better or worse, and his comments had come out wrong.
"There really has been a misunderstanding and for that I'm sorry," he told the broadcaster. "I do have great faith in both the scientific community and the regulatory community at the UK."
EU politicians, meanwhile, defended the bloc's approach. France's Europe minister, Clément Beaune, said France and the 26 other EU member states had "opted for the collective approach – for speed and for safety".
Beaune said that contrary to claims by some British politicians, the UK had not "benefited from Brexit in its decision", since Britain was "still bound, until 31 December, to the European framework". The British government had simply "opted for certain accelerated procedures" available to all, he said.
The German health minister, Jens Spahn, also said the UK had chosen a different route – limited emergency authorisation – that Germany "could have chosen too, but we consciously decided against it".
Spahn said the European Medicines Agency's approval process, expected to be completed by the end of the month, was a "more comprehensive one" and was necessary "in order to strengthen citizens' confidence in the vaccine".
Addressing a video conference of his EU colleagues, Spahn said the idea was "not to be first, but to have a safe and efficient vaccine. It is a matter of expertise, obviously, authorisation. But as we've seen from comments from the UK, it's also a political issue for the European Union."
June Raine, the head of the MHRA, previously insisted that "no corners had been cut" in vetting the vaccine.
Fauci made his original comments before his first meeting with Joe Biden, after which the president-elect confirmed the doctor would stay on as the director of the NIAID and appointed him chief medical adviser.
The remarks came as some British officials pointed to the vaccine as an indicator of the UK's superiority in medical regulation, including the secretary of state for education, Gavin Williamson, who insisted on Thursday that the UK had got the vaccine first because of "the best" medical regulators.
"That doesn't surprise me at all, because we're a much better country than every single one of them," he told LBC radio station.
The deputy chief medical officer for England, Jonathan Van-Tam, also hit back at critics. "If you're a regulator who's slightly further behind, what do you say to justify your position that you are further behind?" he said. "Words such as the ones we've heard, perhaps."
Meanwhile, after the business secretary, Alok Sharma, tweeted that history "will remember this moment as the day the UK led humanity's charge against this disease", Andreas Michaelis, Germany's ambassador to the UK questioned "why is it so difficult to recognise this important step forward as a great international effort and success".
"I really don't think this is a national story," he wrote, pointing out that the German company BioNTech had made a crucial contribution to what he described as a "European and transatlantic" achievement.
An advisory panel of the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is holding a public meeting on 11 December to evaluate the same vaccine, and approval could follow shortly after.
Agence France-Presse contributed to this report