Ensure most deprived have access to Covid vaccine, UK advisers urge
Committee head says rollout should be structured to mitigate health inequalities
People from minority ethnic backgrounds and deprived communities must get timely access to the new Covid vaccine, the head of a government advisory body has said, as the UK's medicines regulator said no corners had been cut in licensing the vaccine in record time.
The public should be reassured that the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine has been subjected to the most thorough scrutiny by experts working round the clock, said Dr June Raine, the chief executive of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Authority (MHRA).
They had recommended the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for a licence "following the most rigorous scientific assessment of every piece of data, so that it meets the required strict standards of safety, of efficacy and of quality", she said at a briefing.
Europe is not expected to license the vaccine until the end of the year. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the US will meet to consider it on 10 December.
Raine said "everyone can be absolutely confident that no corners have been cut" in the UK.
She put the speed of its development down to hard work, dedication and a rolling review that began in June. Every piece of data has been scrutinised over the past months as it became available, without waiting for the final trial results. Raine said the safety of the public was paramount.
Two more vaccines are being considered for a licence – Moderna's, which is similar to the Pfizer jab, and Oxford University/AstraZeneca's, which uses a different technology. Raine said experts would be working over Christmas to assess these.
Prof Wei Shen Lim, the head of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, an independent adviser to the government, said the first priority for vaccination remained people in care homes and those who looked after them, followed by people aged over 80 and NHS staff.
The committee is urging local authorities and public health leaders to work together to ensure that the most needy in their communities get vaccinated "to mitigate against health inequalities that might occur in relation to ethnicity, deprivation or access to healthcare".
Lim said: "We have a vaccine that is acceptably safe and effective. Good vaccine uptake will save lives."
Prof Dame Sally Davies, the former chief medical officer for England, told MPs on Wednesday that people with learning disabilities should also be prioritised to receive the coronavirus vaccine.
Her comments follow a November report from Public Health England that found the death rate in England among people with learning disabilities was up to six times higher than the general population.
"It took us quite a while to understand which groups were most at risk," she told the science and technology select committee. Asked whether people with learning disabilities should receive the vaccine early, she said: "We have a clear sight of who is most at risk and I would think they should be included in the prioritisation of vaccines."
The report found that the Covid-19 death rate for people with registered learning disabilities was 451 per 10,000 between March and June, more than four times higher than the general population. But it warned the real figure could be more than six times higher as not all deaths in people with learning disabilities were registered on the databases used.
The MHRA says it is confident the vaccine is very safe. The few side-effects reported include a sore arm and headache, which go away within a day or so, it has said. But the safety of the vaccine will be constantly monitored over the coming months and years.
The MHRA has a "yellow card" system through which the public and healthcare staff can report any adverse events. A random selection of people who have the vaccine will receive letters asking them to feed back on their experience.
The vaccine comes in two shots, three weeks apart. Sir Munir Pirmohamed from Liverpool University, who chairs the commission on human medicine expert working group that advised the MHRA, said there would be some effect after the first dose. "Some protection occurred after 12 days," he said, although real immunity kicked in about seven days after the second dose.
The experts have scrutinised the quality of the manufacturing process, and batches of the vaccine will be tested to ensure they are up to standard as they arrive in the UK.
"We did look at the stability of the vaccine. It is stable at -70C. It is stable for a short period of time at 2C to 8C, which allows it to be transported to the relevant vaccination sites," said Pirmohamed.