Victoria defends deputy chief medical officer after she compared James Cook to Covid-19
Annaliese van Diemen's tweeted analogy drew ire of state opposition MPs, as well as federal MPs and senators
Victoria's deputy chief health officer, who drew a historical analogy between the arrivals of James Cook and Covid-19 to Australia, has been defended by the state government, which has praised her for doing "an outstanding job".
Dr Annaliese van Diemen, public health physician and general practitioner, who holds degrees from Monash, Sydney and James Cook universities, tweeted:
"Sudden arrival of an invader from another land, decimating populations, creating terror. Forces the population to make enormous sacrifices &amp; completely change how they live in order to survive. COVID19 or Cook 1770?"
Van Diemen was drawing an analogy between the arrival of Europeans in Australia in the late 18th century and the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020.
European explorers had been visiting the Australian continent since the 17th century, and Cook did not settle in Australia. But British settlement, led by Arthur Philip, followed Cook's extensive mapping of Australia's east coast.
Van Diemen's tweet generated a vituperative response from opposition members of the Victorian parliament, as well as federal MPs and senators.
Victoria's opposition leader, Michael O'Brien, said the tweet was embarrassing and inappropriate.
"Daniel Andrews' deputy chief health officer should be working on giving Victorians a pathway out of Labor's lockdown, not giving us woke political commentary on Twitter," he said in a statement.
"No wonder many Victorians are questioning why our lockdown has no end in sight: the government is too busy playing politics on Twitter."
Senator for Tasmania (known as Van Diemen's Land until 1856) Eric Abetz suggested van Diemen (the Victorian doctor, not the erstwhile governor general of the Dutch East Indies) read historian Geoffrey Blainey, and "stick to the task at hand" of suppressing the pandemic.
"I'm sure her medical expertise is exceptional. Her attempt in the discipline of history would be hysterical if she didn't expect to be treated seriously. This tortured, non-relevant attempted analogy may enhance her 'wokeness' credentials amongst the few but will leave the vast majority of Australians demanding a focus by her on the urgent task at hand," he said.
But the Victorian health minister, Jenny Mikakos, said the deputy chief health officer was "doing an outstanding job protecting Victorians from this deadly pandemic".
"Criticism from angry MPs is irrelevant to the fight against this virus."