Australia's coronavirus victims: Covid-19 related deaths across the country
As the number of cases rises, so does the number of those who have died. Here is a state-by-state list of virus-related fatalities
The Australian death toll from Covid-19 related illnesses stands at 89, as of 29 April. This story will be updated as Australia's coronavirus victims are identified.
Janet Lieben, 67, Orange
On 1 April, Janet Lieben, died after contracting Covid-19. The 67-year-old was a passenger on the Ruby Princess cruise ship.
The Daily Telegraph has reported that her husband, Jerry, also contracted the disease on board, and was unable to be with her as she passed away in a regional hospital in Orange.
The Dorothy Henderson Lodge
Six of the NSW Covid-19 deaths have been residents of the Dorothy Henderson Lodge aged care facility in the Sydney suburb of Macquarie Park. A 95-year-old woman died on 3 March, followed by an 82-year-old man on 9 March, a 90-year-old woman on 14 March and a 91-year-old woman on 28 March. The death of a 95-year-old woman was reported on 1 April.
On 7 April, a 90 year-old male died at Dorothy Henderson Lodge in Macquarie Park.
A number of other residents and staff members have tested positive for Covid-19.
Opal Care Bankstown
There are now two deaths associated with Opal Care Bankstown.
On 6 April, NSW Health confirmed an 86-year-old male resident died at Liverpool Hospital.
The next day a 90 year-old male resident died at the same hospital.
Newmarch House
Six residents at Newmarch House in Sydney's west have died in a week.
According to NSW Health, the aged care facility has recorded 54 confirmed cases of coronavirus - including 20 staff and 34 residents, making it the largest coronavirus cluster in the state after the Ruby Princess ship.
On 18 April, a 93-year-old man with multiple health issues died after testing positive for Covid-19.
On 19 April, a 94-year-old resident of Sydney died.
A 92-year-old woman became the third resident to die on 22 April after testing positive for Covid-19, followed by a 79-year-old woman on 23 April, a 96-year-old woman on April 24, and an 83-year-old man with multiple health issues on April 25.
On 28 April Newmarch house confirmed the deaths of five patients in 24 hours. One of these deaths was of an 89-year-old woman, the details of the other four will not be released.
Unnamed
Other NSW deaths related to Covid-19 include an 86-year-old man on 18 March and an 81-year-old woman on 20 March.
A 77-year-old woman from the Sunshine Coast died after her health deteriorated on a flight to Sydney on 13 March. She was taken to a Sydney hospital but could not be resuscitated. It was later confirmed she had Covid-19. She is believed to have had an underlying medical condition.
On 3 April, a 74-year-old woman who is believed to have contracted the virus overseas died in an Albury hospital. On the same day, a 75-year-old man died in Wollongong. He was a passenger on the Ovation of the Seas cruise ship.
On 5 April, NSW Health authorities confirmed four men died overnight. A 61-year-old in Hornsby Hospital, a 76-year- old and 80-year old at Westmead and a 91-year-old from Port Macquarie. Three of these men were believed to be passengers on the Ruby Princess cruise ship.
It follows the death of another unnamed passenger on 24 March, with a woman in her 70s dying after disembarking from the Ruby Princess earlier that week. She was transported directly to the hospital from the ship. The NSW Health Department said she was one of the initial three passengers who were confirmed to have tested positive on board the ship.
On 6 April, an 85-year-old-man died at Liverpool Hospital, he was a close contact of another confirmed case of Covid-19.
On 7 April, an 87 year-old woman passed away at Sutherland Hospital. She was a passenger on the Ruby Princess.
On 9 April, a 69-year-old man died in John Hunter hospital in Newcastle. He is believed to have caught the virus on a trip to Queensland.
On 11 April, a 91-year-old woman died in hospital – no further details were immediately available.
The death of an 82-year-old man with pre-existing medical conditions was reported on 12 April.
On 13 April, the health minister, Brad Hazzard, announced that a 74-year-old woman had died at John Hunter hospital, and a 76-year-old man at the Northern Beaches hospital. Both were passengers on the Ruby Princess.
On 16 April, a 58-year-old female who suffered a range of co-morbidities died in Tamworth hospital. A test found she was Covid-19 positive when she died.
On 18 April, an 83-year-old man, with a range of co-morbidities and confirmed Covid-19, passed away today at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. He was a Queensland resident and passenger on Celebrity Eclipse, an overseas cruise ship that docked in San Diego.
On 22 April, NSW chief medical officer Dr Kerry Chant announced two people had died overnight after testing positive with coronavirus. These included a 75-year-old man at St George Hospital, who was a household contact of a known case; an 80-year-old woman, who passed away in Gosford hospital with pre-existing medical conditions, who was part of a Gosford hospital outbreak.
Elaine Cairns, Melbourne
Elaine Cairns died in hospital on April 4. She was aged in her 70s and was a dedicated volunteer at the Mornington Railway Preservation Society, who shared the news of her death of Facebook.
"Elaine Cairns, a friend to many of us, and a long-serving member of our marketing team came home after an overseas trip recently and passed away this morning as a direct result of her contracting Covid-19," the post read.
"Rest in Peace Elaine, thank you for everything you did for us at the Mornington Railway and God Bless You."
Sumith Pramachandra, 55, Melbourne
The 55-year-old passed away at Dandenong Hospital on 6 April, several days after being diagnosed.
His daughter, Sharyn, shared a tribute on Facebook.
"Our hearts are broken into a million pieces. He was the most charismatic, kind-hearted, generous, hilarious, lovable, godly and caring man you would ever meet. Everyone that knew him would tell you he lit up any room he walked into and his presence will never be replaced," she said.
"Our dad was a disability nurse, a health care worker on the frontline, but for those of you that aren't taking Covid-19 seriously, it may be hard not to see your friends and family at the moment but you can choose to isolate now or potentially live with the heartbreak of losing them forever."
Marion Scott, 82, Melbourne
Marion Scott died at the Frankston Hospital near Melbourne on 7 April after contracting Covid-19. The 82-year-old was Victoria's twelfth casualty.
"Mum wasn't number twelve, mum was our mum, grandmother, a great grandmother. Her name was Marion and she was loved so much," Scott's daughter, Marlene Stevenson, told 7 News.
Scott was hospitalised 10 days after attending a radiology centre for a hip scan. A number of staff members from the centre have since tested positive to Covid-19.
Giuseppe Franzoni, 84, Melbourne
Giuseppe Franzoni died at the Sunshine Hospital in Melbourne on 18 April.
The 84-year-old's family told The Age he was "larger than life".
"He loved his family and would travel to the end of the world for them, but he expected the same in return," said his son Frank Franzoni.
Unable to be with him as he died, Franzoni's family watched his last moments over a video call.
Unnamed
Three men, all in their 70s, died on 26 March after being diagnosed with Covid-19. The death of a fourth man, in his 80s, was reported on 29 March.
On 1 April, a woman in her 70s died in hospital. The death of another woman in her 60s, which occurred the same night in a Melbourne hospital, was reported the following day.
On 3 April, the chief health officer confirmed a man in his 70s had died in intensive care in hospital overnight.
On 6 April, Victorian health minister Jenny Mikakos confirmed a woman in her 80s had died overnight.
On 7 April, premier Daniel Andrews said an 11th Victoria had died overnight.
On 10 April, a man in his 80s died in hospital. No further details were available at the time.
On 11 April, Mikakos said another man in his 80s had died in hospital.
On 23 April, Mikakos announced that a man in his 60s had died overnight.
On 26 April, Mikakos confirmed that a man in his 90s had died in hospital overnight, bringing the state's total deaths to 17.
On 29 April it was confirmed a woman in her 80s has died after being diagnosed with Covid-19.
James Kwan, 78, Perth
James Kwan was the first person in Australia to die after being diagnosed with Covid-19. The 78-year-old Perth man was a passenger on board the Diamond Princess, a cruise ship that was forced to quarantine in the Japanese port of Yokohama in February.
He and his wife were among the 150 Australians who were isolated on board.
He was transported home to Australia on a government-chartered Qantas flight and was diagnosed while isolating in Howard Springs, Northern Territory. He was then moved to a Perth hospital where died in the early hours of 1 March.
Kwan has been remembered as a tourism pioneer, establishing Perth's first inbound tourism company, Wel-Travel in 1988. He was a founding member of the Western Australian Tour Operators Association, now known as the Australian Tourism Export Council.
Ray Daniels, 73, Perth
On 26 March, a second WA man, Ray Daniels died at the Joondalup Health Campus after being diagnosed with Covid-19.
"We as a family are completely devastated by the sudden death of our father, husband and grandfather. He was a very fit, healthy and active man with no known underlying health issues. He showed no real significant signs of being unwell until he collapsed at home on Wednesday morning. He died within 48 hours," his family said in a statement.
"Clearly this virus does not discriminate and we never believed for one second that it would take him from us."
He disembarked from the Celebrity Solstice cruise ship in Sydney earlier in the week.
Artania Cruise Ship
On 3 April, a German tourist died in Perth. The man, in his 70s, was a passenger on the Artania cruise ship and had been transferred to hospital a week earlier.
A 42-year-old Filipino who was a crew member of the Artania died in Perth Royal hospital, becoming the youngest victim of Covid-19 in Australia to date. Announcing the man's death on 17 April, the WA health minister, Roger Cook, said the man had been put in touch with his family before he died.
"His family have been notified, and were put in contact with that crew member via translators and the shipping company," Cook said. "They were able to reach out to him in his dying days."
On 24 April, Western Australia authorities reported a male passenger in his 70s on the Artania cruise ship, who was being treated for Covid-19, died overnight.
Unnamed
On 6 April, WA health minister Roger Cook announced a man in his 80s died from Covid-19 at Royal Perth hospital.
On 7 April, Cook announced that a man and a woman, both in their 70s, had died overnight. The woman died at the Royal Perth hospital and had recently returned from overseas. The man was a passenger on the Artania cruise ship. He died at Joondalup health campus.
Garry Kirstenfeldt, 68, Toowoomba
Garry Kirstenfeldt was the second Queensland victim, and the first to die in Queensland.
The 68-year-old died on 25 March in Toowoomba, after recently disembarking from the Voyager of the Seas cruise ship in Sydney.
His family say he was an avid traveller.
"Our father was a man with much more life in him," his children said in a statement.
"He had been on 16 cruise ships and loved to relax with family or worry about activities to keep us entertained … We never expected his 17th cruise to be his last or no one to be at his side for the last moments of his life. As his family, this was the first time he had been in hospital and we were not at his side."
The Queensland Department of Health said he had a serious underlying medical condition before contracting the virus
His wife Jennifer and other members of his family are now in self-isolation.
Karla Lake, 75, Caboolture
Karla Lake, and her husband Graeme both contracted Covid-19 while on the Ruby Princess cruise ship.
Graeme told 7 News that he was in the room with Karla when she passed away in a Caboolture hospital on 29 March.
"She was just the loveliest person you could ever have married," he said.
"She was an angel. She used to do work for Vietnam veterans in Hervey Bay… She would have done anything for everyone."
Des Williams, 85, Toowoomba
On 2 April Des Williams, who was a passenger on the Ruby Princess cruise ship, passed away in a Toowoomba hospital.
His family say he was a patient and loving grandfather.
"Des was a beautiful man who saw the best in every person and gave so much of his time to each and every one of us," his relative Jacqui Blackburn posted on Facebook.
"The news are reporting that an elderly man passed away, but while Des was 85, he had the health and strength of a 75-year-old. I wish they wouldn't say he was elderly because he was nothing like that. He would spend most of his days in the garden tending to his plants and his garden."
Williams was a retired minister at St Stephen's Uniting Church.
His wife Bev was also a passenger on the ship, however, relatives say she is in good physical health.
Unnamed
On 5 April, Queensland Health confirmed that a 78-year-old man had died at the Prince Charles hospital in Brisbane. The man had underlying medical conditions and had contracted the disease after recently returning from a cruise.
*Queensland counts the death of a Queensland woman who died in Sydney as part of its toll but she is included in national figures under NSW deaths and is in this piece too. Queensland also counts the death of an 83-year-old man who passed away from coronavirus while quarantined in Sydney. He is included in this piece under NSW deaths.
On the morning of 30 March, Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein confirmed the state's first death, a woman in her 80s, who died in the North West Regional hospital in Burnie. A second Tasmanian death was reported on 31 March, a man in his 80s. Both had been passengers on the Ruby Princess, the state's health minister, Sarah Courtney, said.
On 7 April, a man in his eighties died at the North West Regional Hospital. He was a passenger on board the Ruby Princess.
On 10 April, Gutwein confirmed the death of a man in his late 70s, who was being cared for at the North West Regional Hospital.
On 12 April, Gutwein announced the death of a woman in her 70s at the same hospital. The same day he announced that it and the North West private hospital would close for 14 days as a result of the cluster of cases associated with patients and healthcare workers there. All of Tasmania's 133 cases to that date had been in the north-west of the state.
On 14 April, Gutwein offered his condolences to the family of a 91-year-old woman who died at the Mersey Community hospital in Devonport overnight.
On 17 April the death was reported of a 72-year-old man, also in the Mersey.
On 18 April, a 74-year-old man died at the Mersey hospital.
On 24 April, the death of a 79-year-old woman from the state' s North West was reported. She was being cared for at the Launceston General Hospital.
On 25 April, Gutwein confirmed the state's 10th coronavirus death, a 90-year-old man from the North West. He was being cared for at the Mersey Community Hospital.
On 27 April, Gutwein announced that another North West man in his 90s from the North West died.
Francesco Ferraro, 75, Adelaide
On 6 April, South Australia recorded the state's first death, 75-year-old Francesco (Frank) Ferraro from metropolitan Adelaide, who died at the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
"Mr. Ferraro was a loving husband and father to three children and grandfather to eight," his family said in a statement.
His family said Ferraro had attended a family function interstate in March and began to feel unwell when he returned.
"My father's interactions which caused the spread of the virus were nothing outside what a family or group of friends would experience.
"The family would like to take this opportunity to implore all South Australians to abide by and comply with all the advice and directions given by the government and police."
Unnamed
A 62-year-old woman died early on 8 April after contracting the virus as a passenger on the Ruby Princess. SA's chief public health officer, Nicola Spurrier, said it was understood the woman had "some very mild health problems, but that would be the same as most other 62-year-olds in our society".
A 76-year-old man who acquired Covid-19 in the Barossa Valley died on 9 April.
On 12 April SA Health reported that a 74-year-old man from metropolitan Adelaide had died the previous night in Royal Adelaide hospital. The man had acquired Covid-19 on the Ruby Princess.
A woman in her 80s became the territory's first fatality on 30 March. She had been a passenger on the Ruby Princess, the territory's health authorities reported.
A man in his 80s, who had pre-existing health issues, died at the Canberra Hospital on 4 April.
On 14 April ACT chief health officer Dr Kerryn Coleman, advised the Canberra community of the territory's third death from Covid-19. The woman aged in her 60s died at the Canberra hospital. She acquired the virus while onboard the Ruby Princess.
A 36-year-old Australian man diagnosed with Covid-19 died in Iceland.
However, doctors said the man's symptoms were atypical and although he had the illness they were continuing to investigate the cause of his death.
