'Looks like threesomes are back': NSW's two-visitor rule presents opportunities – and conundrums
Gladys Berejiklian's partial lifting of coronavirus restrictions to allow two adults to visit a household has thrown up a new set of problems
In New South Wales, two adults can visit another household from Friday as part of the state government's easing of social distancing measures.
Big enough for a Coldplay reunion, not enough for the Spice Girls.
It's a welcome reprieve for many NSW residents, who have spent the last month unable to see friends or family for whom they aren't caregivers.
But the changes have thrown up a new kind of problem: how do you choose which two people you visit first on Friday night?
Or worse, for those of you throwing bridal showers or birthday parties, what criteria do you use to pick who from your inner circle gets to attend in-person?
For those of us who once had MySpace accounts, what is about to happen may feel like the times we had to brutally rank our top eight friends for all our followers to see.
Here are some of your options:
It's been a tough time for families spread out across multiple households and parts of the state.
Naturally, for many people, their first instinct will be to pay a visit to parents, siblings, cousins and grandparents.
The premier's office clarified to Guardian Australia that there is no restriction on how far you can travel to visit someone and you can stay overnight at their place, meaning you can finally drive from Sydney to Orange to have that cup of tea you've been promising your nan.
Single people rejoice: hooking up with anyone you've swiped right on is one step closer to being a reality.
Steering clear of each other as much as possible has made it hard to go out on dates or take things to the next level with someone who is not your regular sexual partner.
Some people living on their own or, worse, with a loved-up couple, said they have felt "starved for human touch".
But since Gladys Berejiklian announced the two-person visitor rule, several people speculated this would be the perfect time for individuals, or groups, to get it on.
We note that you are expected to follow physical distancing measures during these visits, so don't expect to be cosying up just yet. One foot forward, another six back.
Maybe you have been living off instant noodles and sandwiches since your go-to restaurant stopped trading three weeks ago. Maybe the only thing you look forward to about dinner at the moment is which bottle of wine you are going to wash it down with.
For you, Friday night offers the first chance in over a month to eat a decent meal.
Invite yourself over to see your friend who has spent isolation cultivating their sourdough starter and growing spring onions out of used shallot ends.
Dogs and cats don't count in the number of people you are allowed to visit under these eased restrictions.
Make a beeline for those friends who decided to rescue a puppy during isolation and see three smiley faces for the price of two.
Children also don't count in the total number of people who you are allowed to see but their presence at the dinner table could limit your freedom to use colourful language while complaining about the state of the world.
For some, the Berejiklian government's announcement is the worst news to come for weeks.
Suddenly you can't blame the government for not being able to have dinner with your sister's boyfriend who won't stop talking about his bitcoin investment.
And there is no decent excuse for bailing on Saturday morning backyard training with the girls.
Unfortunately for others, continued social distancing isn't going to be a choice.