Guardian Essential poll: suspicions about tracing app offset by approval of Covid-19 response
More than 50% of voters are concerned about security of Covidsafe app, while 57% believe it will limit spread of coronavirus
An extraordinary surge of approval for the federal government's handling of the pandemic response is helping encourage voters suspicious about the Covidsafe app to install it anyway.
Some 57% of voters told Essential Research in a survey released Tuesday they were concerned about the security of personal information collected by the app.
But 41% were confident the government would protect any data, which medical authorities argue is useful to trace contacts wth people who have been hit by the coronavirus.
That reflected a strong vote of confidence in the government's handling of the crisis.
Some 70% of voters said the management of the pandemic response had been quite good or very good, compared to just 45% a month ago. A week ago the approval rating was 65%, Essential Research had found.
Younger Australians were the most sceptical with 55% of those aged 18 to 34 years classifying the response as good. That quickly jumped to 72% for those aged 35 to 54, and peaked at 82% for the age group most vulnerable to the disease, those aged 55 and above.
A signifiant number of voters gave other reasons to install the app, which acknowledged they accepted the advice from health and medical leaders and the government.
A hefty 53% said they believed the app would limit the spread of Covid-19, and 46% said use of the app would speed up the removal of physical distancing restrictions.
Voters gave state governments mixed ratings for their pandemic performances.
Victoria and South Australia topped the mainland states with each getting a 77% approval rating. Western Australia was next on 76% followed by Queensland on 67% and NSW on 63%, or 14 percentage points below the top two states.
Voters were prepared to give the federal government advice on economic reform as the debate begins to shift to policies for the recovery, including how to pay for the $320bn spent reducing the pandemic pain.
Prime minister Scott Morrison might be getting applause for the health battle but voters want reassurance about the nation's economic fate.
Some 85% are concerned about the economy as a whole and 83% have worries about business closures and unemployment.
Essential found 64% of voters supported prevention of companies registered in offshore tax havens getting government support during the crisis.
Some 61% of voters aged 35 to 54 and 80% of over 55s backed discrimination against those exploiting overseas tax schemes.
Just 18% backed death duties and a scant 32% wanted removal of franking credits and negative gearing.
But the virus itself remains the key topic, and a swelling number of voters believe they will not be its victims.
Essential Research found 73% of respondents thought they were unlikely to catch the virus, up from 69% last week and 58% a month ago.