National Australia Bank launches $3.5bn capital raising as earnings hit by coronavirus
NAB, which has large exposure to small and medium-sized business, reveals first-half profit down 51%
National Australia Bank has announced a $1bn hit to its bottom line and will seek to raise $3.5bn in new capital to bolster its balance sheet in the face of the Covid-19 crisis.
The bank, one of the big four, revealed its first half, after-tax profit was down 51% to $1.31bn compared with the same six months in 2019. NAB operates on a different financial year from most banks and these results are for the six months to 31 March 2020, which includes the first few weeks of the strict shutdown rules.
NAB has the largest exposure to small and medium-sized businesses of the big four banks and so will be more affected by the closures of restaurants, cafes, hotels and small retailers.
But the results revealed by NAB demonstrate how the economic impact of the coronavirus is quickly rippling through other parts of the economy, including the financial sector.
The federal government has urged the banks to show forbearance to mortgage holders and business lenders during the crisis. It has announced a 50% loan guarantee scheme for small and medium-sized businesses with turnover up to $50m in a bid to keep those businesses afloat.
In recent weeks the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has also urged the banks to set up hotlines and provide bridging loans to small businesses waiting for jobkeeper payments to start flowing in May.
But the crisis, inevitably, is affecting the banks' bottom line as well.
NAB announced it would raise $3bn from institutional investors and a further $500m through a retail placement with its shareholders to bolster its balance sheet.
CEO Ross McEwan said NAB had entered the downturn in "a robust position" but had decided to raise capital to deal with the impact of impaired loans and a requirement to mark-to-market its loan portfolio.
Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning
He said the bank was provisioning for $2.135bn of "forward looking adjustments for anticipated stress".
Moody's investor services said the capital raising would "significantly strengthen NAB's capital base and boost its buffers against potential credit losses and rising capital requirements amid the broad economic downturn".
The bank's decision to increase its collective provisions to $4.4bn underlines its balance sheet strength to combat the uncertainty ahead, Moody's vice-president, Frank Mirenzi, said.
McEwan said the bank had consulted with its economists on the likely impact of the pandemic and the baseline scenario used by the bank assumed an 8.4% drop in GDP and unemployment rising to 11%.
But he said he did not know whether to expect a V-shaped recovery, where the economy bounced back as fast as it slumped, or whether the recession would be a more prolonged U-shaped one.
He said the bank had modelled for both but "at this stage we don't know and would be very surprised if anyone did."
The financial hit to the banks will now flow through to shareholders, including self-funded retirees and superannuation funds.
Against the advice of the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority, NAB has decided to continue to pay a dividend of 30 cents a share, but cut it by 64%.
McEwan said the bank needed to balance returning capital to shareholders with having a strong balance sheet.
The bank's senior management will also feel the pain. The NAB chairman and directors will forego 20% of their base fees for the second half of 2020.
McEwan will forego 20% of his fixed remuneration for second-half 2020 and the CEO and the leadership team will forego short-term variable rewards for financial year 2020.
The pandemic is also prompting NAB to have a major restructure of its business. McEwan, who took over in October, said the new structure would simplify its operations and enable decisions to be made more quickly. He foreshadowed that the pandemic would prompt a rethink in how NAB operated.
Bank shares were down in morning trading on the ASX.