Spending the coronavirus bonus: 'I haven't bought my daughter a birthday present since 2012'
We ask Australians on welfare what the largest boost to their living standards in 20 years will mean to them
From Monday the money promised to support those relying on social security to get through the pandemic is expected to start moving into the accounts of thousands across the nation.
With the economy on ice, many among the 2.2 million casual workers laid off are now joining 700,000 people already living on the jobseeker payment and 200,000 on student payments.
The fortnightly $550 coronavirus supplement will throw a lifeline to many, boosting existing payments such as jobseeker to roughly $1,100 a fortnight, at least until October when it is set to expire.
For those who were already reliant on social security payments such as the jobseeker payment, youth allowance, sickness allowance, Austudy, ABSTUDY and the parenting payment, this money represents the single largest lift to their living standards in more than two decades.
Guardian Australia spoke to seven people to ask what the additional money will mean for them.
Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning
On my current budget, because obviously we get paid fortnightly, there's only about $20 left for food after everything comes out. So my food budget means I have to ration myself to eating every second day. Sometimes I'll go as long as four or five days without eating. I'm very, very much looking forward to the supplement because it means for the first time in a long time I'll be able to buy fresh vegies, fresh fruit.
It also means so much more. I haven't bought my daughter a birthday present since 2012. She'll be 33 in June. I'll be 59. I'm thinking I'll buy her some art supplies – she's very artistic. She only uses the cheap stuff to experiment, but when she makes something she wants to sell, she uses the expensive stuff. As for me, there are all sorts of things I used to do that I've forgotten because I can't afford to do them. I used to knit and crochet, but wool is expensive if you want to make anything like a jumper. I even used to dragon boat race. It's the only sport I've loved and used to train three times a week when I had a job. I even competed nationally. Got medals and everything. But the membership costs money I didn't have, so I stopped.
I've been on the full independent youth allowance payment since I was 16 and became homeless. At the moment, the payment is $100 less than jobseeker, which is based on a highly outdated notion that young people are supported by their family.
When the initial $750 stimulus pay came through, I used it to pay off some bills and buy some groceries. It was hard to find some things because of all the panic buying, but I was able to buy fresh food like mince and put that in the freezer, which I haven't been able to do until recently. Beforehand, skipping meals was definitely something I had to do. I still do it, but it's less of a necessity. I've just gotten used to not eating as much.
The $550 fortnightly supplement basically means I can breathe easier. It means I won't be so stressed about managing every cent like I'm used to. I can use it to pay off an Afterpay bill from when I replaced my jeans and shirts that had been worn past repair. Longer term, I'd like to save for a better computer as my current laptop was given to me by my school years ago, and has been put through the wringer. In the very long term, I'd like to save some money to visit my partner who lives in the US. That's quite expensive, so I'll hope to squirrel away some money to get me there someday.
I've worked part time and lived on what used to be called Newstart for around ten years. I live in a small town where there's limited chance for any kind of full-time occupation, any type of full-time paid work and because I'm 65 it's hard to find a job at that age. I'm lucky though, Wonthaggi is a beautiful place and I have lots of friends who help take care of each other. It's still tough at times. You get that sort of knot in the stomach when you think you've spent too much on food that week. I suppose that big change with that temporary increase is what will lessen that feeling.
The moment I heard about the supplement payment, I immediately started to mentally budget on what I could spend it on. It was instant. The first thing I am going to buy is some cream cheese, some crusty bread and one of those packets of smoked salmon. That's the luxury food that you don't buy at all when you're on that tiny amount. After that are the big things like house repairs and saving for dental work. The stuff on the house you just put off for a long time. There is a leak at the back of my toilet which I'm going to be getting fixed. And my chimney is pretty rusted. Get my car serviced. These are things you put off as a long as you can because no matter what you calculate one repair will lead to another. Same with teeth, really.
Right now I'm working at Dominos to support myself while I do a social work degree. I usually get $300 to $400 a week from Dominos, with Centrelink topping up my wage. Before the $750 stimulus, I was overcharging my bank account by $50. Usually we were just getting by, month-to-month.
I've got $300 in savings – not much for an emergency. It was tough even getting basics like veggies and fuel. I help my partner out as well. She struggles with her mental health and studies. I work so she can take care of herself.
The payment was announced pretty much on my birthday, so it was happy birthday from the Australian government. The money'll basically mean we're buying time. One day me and my partner would like to get married, have kids. We're thinking about moving to Melbourne one day, but we have to sort out work first, finish the degrees. Right now though we're just trying to survive, so the money means we'll be able to do that. I'll be able to cover car registration. I'll be stocking up on food a little bit – we go to the Asian grocer because no one tends to buy from there because they're worried about getting the coronavirus from Asian people. Which is stupid. Migraine medication is not on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme so that's $50 every time, which will be easier to get now. What it means is time to study. Less time to work. Time to prepare to make a big change.
I've variously been on what was called Newstart and the New Enterprise Incentive Scheme for nearly two years – I run an Airbnb, which gives me opportunities others don't have, though with the recent fires and now the pandemic, we're not getting any visitors.
When I heard they were giving additional money, I was cynical. I was under the impression this money was only going to people who were laid off because of the virus. Change might be happening, but it's government isn't it? I did not trust that there would not be some loophole. I'm still not sure if I qualify. I haven't heard from anyone directly, though I'm not thinking about it. I'm in survival mode.
It would be great if it happens. It means I can pay my friend back the thousand dollars I borrowed when I needed it. Then there's the house – there's always something that needs repairing. I can plan and organise for my small business food van to get up and running again. It'll mean I can buy bulk ingredients and because of the pandemic and social distancing rules I will need to rethink how to operate. I plan to take orders and deliver orders directly to homes.
My life could change, but realistically, I won't believe it until I see it. I try not to get my hopes up, because I can't risk feeling hopelessness.
I walked to work at my part-time job this morning. A middle-aged man on a bike yelled at me because I didn't have cigarettes for him. The cops were surprised when I told them I'm homeless too.
I'm so close to living in my car again. I've got a bed this week in a $50 apartment. It's just a bed and bath with no other facilities – not even garbage collection. No cooking or laundry. At least I can lock my door and not worry about creeps staring in my car window.
The extra $550 a fortnight is a great relief, but it was luck the government decided to do this. I've been kicked off the public housing list so maybe I'll use that money to get a pair of glasses so I can see and write my re-application and housing appeal? It's not enough to pay my car rego. Definitely a good pair of shoes ... some new clothes. A bit of dignity. Is that a luxury? I'll eat a little better, if I can have a fridge to store food in. My overall health will improve with the certainty of a good night's sleep. Without a home I can't get my cat back.
When Covid-19 clears up, I'll get back to studying my law and criminology degree. Maybe the money will help. Though it's terrifying there is an end date – afterwards people are going to be shunted back to abject poverty. Me? Next week, it looks like I'll be couch surfing in Brisbane again, where my tribe is.
I'm a single mum with two kids and usually a full-time chef. The transition from the parenting payment to Newstart, back when my eldest was eight, was rough. We spent three months living in a car. Now I use it to top up my income, but I lost my job in the pandemic. I don't think that pub will open again.
Until they announced they were going to do the coronavirus supplement, I was honestly terrified. I didn't know what we were going to do for money. I was selling things to keep us going. Until it comes I've only got $48 to survive on, and that's to feed my two girls. I did my grocery shopping this week on $19. Right now my bank balance is 42 cents. When the money does come through, I'll be replacing some of the stuff I sold.
The main thing is to keep paying for my girls' education. I want them to have a better life than I had so I want to buy them a future. VET courses are $900 a year, combined. Then there's school books. E-books. Pens and pencils. School bags for when they go back. Uniforms. Their laptops were $1,000 each. Then there's the internet, which I have to have now at $90 a month. A printer.
That supplement is going to make a huge difference to my household, being able to pay the rent, buy food. It's hope, but then there'll also be despair at the end. A bit of grief and loss. Because all of a sudden, in October, we'll go back to nothing again.
As told to Royce Kurmelovs. The interviews have been edited for length and clarity
*Name has been changed