Coronavirus: French PM to set out road to normality, restrictions ease in Australia
Western Australia and Queensland cautiously loosen social distancing rules, while Beijing bans 'uncivilised' behaviour
The French prime minister, Edouard Philippe, will present the national strategy for emerging from the coronavirus lockdown to the French parliament on Tuesday, his office has announced.
The pandemic has killed 22,614 people in France since the start of March, with officials on Saturday reporting 369 new deaths in the previous 24 hours. The global death toll from the novel coronavirus pandemic passed 200,000 on Sunday.
Seventeen priorities have been identified for gradually bringing France out of lockdown from 11 May. These include reopening schools, companies returning to work, getting public transport back to normal, the supply of masks and sanitiser, testing policy and support for the elderly. Philippe's presentation to the National Assembly on Tuesday will be followed by a debate and a vote.
France's move comes as the World Health Organization has warned against "immunity passports" for recovered patients, seen as a possible tool for countries preparing to reopen their economies. "There is currently no evidence that people who have recovered from Covid-19 and have antibodies are protected from a second infection," said a WHO statement.
In Australia, some state governments have announced relaxation of social distancing. Western Australia said that from Monday, 10 people would be allowed to gather indoors, and resume "non-contact recreational activities" such as private picnics, fishing, boating, hiking and camping. The Queensland government said family picnics, non-essential shopping and trips of up to 50km from home would be allowed from next Saturday.
Meanwhile Australia's federal government cited preliminary findings that there is very little risk of transmission among schoolchildren, or from children to adults including teachers. The states are in charge of schools and the central government in Canberra has been pushing for them to reopen.
In China, the city government of Beijing has banned "uncivilised" behaviour such as not covering the mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing, in a new set of regulations to improve public hygiene. The laws aim to promote "civilised behaviour" to combat the pandemic that has infected more than 82,000 people in China alone.
Rule-breakers will be slapped with fines for offences including not wearing a mask in public when ill, the municipal government said. The laws also require public places to set up one-metre distance markers and to provide communal chopsticks and serving spoons for shared meals.
Citizens must also "dress neatly" in public and not go shirtless – an apparent reference to the so-called "Beijing bikini", in which men roll T-shirts up to expose their stomachs in hot weather.
Authorities reported no new deaths for the 10th straight day in China, where the virus originated. South Korea reported just 10 fresh cases, the eighth day in a row its daily increase was under 20. There were no new deaths for the second straight day.
In the US, the states of Georgia, Oklahoma and Alaska started loosening restrictions on businesses despite warnings from experts that such steps might be premature. Donald Trump has said he will no longer give daily coronavirus briefings after he promoted the dangerous internal use of disinfectant as a possible treatment – the latest in a string of debunked, unproven or potentially lethal ideas he has mentioned at the press conferences.
The UK's prime minister, Boris Johnson, is expected to return to work on Monday and will face the dilemma of how and when to ease restrictions on British life.
Other developments around the world:
The number of confirmed deaths in the coronavirus pandemic increased to 202,846 on Saturday, according to Johns Hopkins University. There are 2,896,746 confirmed cases.
President Donald Trump's administration is considering replacing its secretary of Health and Human Services, Alex Azar, because of early missteps in the handling of the coronavirus pandemic, the Wall Street Journal and Politico reported. A White House spokesperson denied the claim.
State media in Saudi Arabia are reporting that the curfew will be partially lifted for all regions starting Sunday, but that a 24-hour curfew will be maintained in Mecca. Some economic and commercial activities, including retail stores, will reopen during Ramadan, from 29 April to 13 May.
German police arrested dozens of protesters in Berlin on Saturday for flouting the coronavirus lockdown measures they were demonstrating against. About 1,000 people turned out for the rally, which has become a weekly event in the German capital. Saturday's protest attracted mainly far-left activists but there were also rightwing supporters and members of other fringe groups.
Spain could lift more lockdown restrictions and allow adults out to exercise from 2 May if efforts to contain the spread of the virus continue to pay off, the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has said.