Scott Morrison warns aged care homes to end strict coronavirus lockdowns or face new rules
PM also rejects teachers' union calls for physical distancing in classrooms saying it is 'not a credible requirement'
Scott Morrison has laid down the gauntlet to aged care providers over what he sees as excessive restrictions, warning that the Australian government will step in if elderly residents are locked in their rooms without access to visitors.
The prime minister has also rejected teachers' union calls for physical distancing in classrooms before schools can return, arguing it is not supported by medical advice and "not a credible requirement" to insist on 1.5 metres between students or 4 sq metres of personal space in such settings.
Addressing reporters in Canberra after the latest meeting of the national cabinet, Morrison confirmed he was working with state and territory leaders on plans to resume community sport as the country moved into the "next phase" of the coronavirus response.
Morrison announced that parliament would resume on 12, 13 and 14 May, a move welcomed by the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, who suggested the next session would need to deal with "important privacy legislation" to protect information gathered by Australia's contact tracing app.
Morrison confirmed the ABC report that data collected from the app, still under development but soon to be released, would be stored by Amazon Web Services.
But Morrison said the servers would be located in Australia and "it will be illegal for information to go out of that data store to any other person other than" people conducting contract tracing, rejecting the thrust of the story that data would be within reach of US intelligence services.
On Friday the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, also announced a raft of changes expanding eligibility for the $130bn jobkeeper wage subsidy, including allowing charities to exclude government revenue from the reduction in turnover needed to access the program.
"This will help to ensure that the eligibility of charities is not adversely affected where they are delivering significant services that are funded by government," Frydenberg said.
The move is designed to help charities which run services including child care, homelessness and aged care.
The government will also provide an alternative decline in turnover test for special purpose service entities that employ staff who then work in related entities in a company group. The new test will examine the turnover decline of the related entities using the services of the employer entity.
Earlier, Morrison said national cabinet had reiterated its concerns about some aged care providers imposing restrictions on visitors above and beyond the national rules.
Morrison acknowledged it was "entirely sensible" to have tougher rules in some places such as in north-west Tasmania and western Sydney due to local outbreaks, but this should be an exception rather than a rule.
"More broadly, having people stuck in their rooms, not being able to be visited by their loved ones and carers and other support people, that's not OK," he said.
"We are not going to have these as secret places, where people can't access them."
Morrison warned that if he did not see an "improvement" on a voluntary basis, he would move towards a mandatory system where aged care providers had to apply for permission to stray from the rules.
As New South Wales has announced a phased return to face-to-face teaching in term two and the Australian Capital Territory prepares a plan to do the same, the argument is slowly turning in the commonwealth's favour that schools should be reopened.
But a return to full face-to-face learning is opposed by Victoria, based on its own medical advice, and the New South Wales Teachers Federation, which has called for physical distancing in classrooms.
On Friday Morrison reiterated that schools did not need to impose the rules, telling Sky News "the 1.5m [distance] and the 4 sq metre [rules] are not required, based on the health advice, so suggestions that are coming from that group that this is necessary – that's just not true, that's not a credible requirement".
The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee advised it believes the "venue density" rules are not "appropriate or practical in classrooms or corridors". However, on 16 April the AHPPC did note that schools were taking such measures to "minimise risk".
Morrison said physical distancing should apply in the staff room, lunch room and at the pick-up and drop-off of school children but the risk in classrooms was "no different" to workers in supermarkets or bus drivers.
Earlier, at the press conference, he said parents who were trying to work from home while also trying to help the children learn was "not working too well" for them.
"So when we can get back to the point where we can have kids back at school, and we can get people back at work, then I think we're going to see that also lift our economy in ways that we very much need."
National cabinet agreed to a set of "safe workplace principles", asking employers to consult with workers to understand risks and introduce hygiene and physical distancing measures.
The government also released the latest update to its modelling on how the virus was spreading in Australia. The effective rate of transmission remains below 1, although experts urged against complacency.
Jodie McVernon, a professor at the University of Melbourne and director of Doherty Epidemiology, said the modelling team had updated its assumptions about the spread of infections by returned travellers because strong quarantine measures had been put in place.
That meant the estimate of the effective rate of transmission was "a bit higher than our previous report, but still below the critical threshold of 1 needed to prevent case numbers from increasing, confirming that current public health and distancing measures are working".
According to the revised estimates, the reproduction rate remains above 1 in Tasmania, and just below in Western Australia and Queensland.