First Nations people have faced moments like this before. We can learn from the poems that sprang from them
From Oodgeroo Noonuccal and Alexis Wright to Ali Cobby Eckermann and Kerry Reed-Gilbert, poetry can show us the collective power of care
This is not unprecedented.
Not the presence of a new disease. Not the enforced social measures that fragment how we interact, and who with. Not the laying to waste of the environment. Not the strategies of triage, and stratified disposability of human lives.
I think of this every time I get a communication from someone that starts with a sentence about our "unprecedented" or "exceptional" situation. I'm not the only one to see it. Indigenous scholars globally – across epidemiology, economics, public health, critical race studies, and law – have noted it. For mob, these events are precedented – horrifically, recently, and at a scale that those who casually compare home isolation to "prison" could not even comprehend, as Tabitha Lean writes for IndigenousX.
Why start a piece about poetry like this? Well, in part because every piece published right now has to acknowledge the crisis happening around us as a foundational anxiety of its audience.
But also because, in our enduring foundation of trauma as First Nations people, I feel compelled to remind readers that we have faced moments like this before – and have ensured our survival by meeting these moments with resilience, resistance and resurgence. Since colonisation, it is from those moments that First Nations poetry has sprung.
Fire Front – a new anthology of First Nations poetry and essays – was published in March, rushed forward from May due to concerns about supply and distribution lines in our latest pandemic.
Plenty of Indigenous poetry, including that featured in Fire Front, has been written in response to something – whether it's individual or collective trauma, major events in colonial history, political movements, moments of respite and joy, even other poems. Fire Front seeks to stand in as a kind of memory to them, with 53 works throughout the history of Indigenous published poetry, and five essays from key Blak thinkers reflecting on what those poems have meant to them, and to us.
And what do these poems mean to us, right now – aside from offering a testament to our survival? They give us the dignity of bearing witness to each other, during a long era through which our testimonies have been discredited, and through which we have been isolated from one another.
What does it mean to hold something like this in your hand, and be there together in a shared – if not always uniform – vision of ourselves as a people? Also, what does it mean to just read good poetry, and to read the essays of others who have been fully immersed in their heat? As these poems go out to First Nations readers, who may have read all or some of them individually, I hope we'll begin to see some of that collective power of care and comfort.
The poems in Fire Front have been chosen because they represent the vital power of a renaissance in Blak verse. These poems know that poetry itself is not enough. These are not poems that observe our world for comfort; instead, they independently (and now together, in this book) clear a path for our imagination. They tell us to do something.
Lionel Fogarty calls us to be cautious of comfortable complicity, "even oiling the dramatist idea after death to the up coming". Samuel Wagan Watson entertains what we do in the void of an inarticulable loss: "I have … fallen into the snares of what the invader prides most of all, and that is the ability to turn blood against blood." Alexis Wright gives us, in Hey Ancestor!, a powerful portent and portrait of scale, time and obligation:
There are skinny old hungry foxes having Maccas with the lot for early Australia day breakfast.
And there is ant out there labouring in the dirt under the wings of a dead butterfly, taken it on a journey that seems to take forever, a journey as great as travelling around the world to the butterflies cemetery.
Evelyn Araluen orders us to look at the poems written about us with new suspicion: "filter gollywog ashtray snugglepot kitsch".
Oodgeroo Noonuccal and Elizabeth Walker each write poems to the late Denis Walker in the famous Son of Mine and the new Grandfather of Mine – a testament to his intergenerational impact, and to the thing about poetry that makes it so very personal: that it is responsible to and loving for someone. As Ali Cobby Eckermann writes, we "breathe life into the bodies of our ancestors … / in the future the petition will be everlasting / even when the language is changed."
We must also honour those poets contained within who are no longer able to speak their words to us – most recently, the champion of First Nations literature Aunty Kerry Reed-Gilbert: "I knew the moment was at hand / the spirits played around him / I got him, he never knew what hit him / he will never utter those words again."
All this, and more, in our long chain of precedent – a precedent of survival despite, which is always worth recalling. But especially now.
Fire Front: First Nations poetry and power today, edited by Alison Whittaker, is out now through UQP