ABC coronavirus podcast becomes the fart that was heard around the world
ABC health editor Norman Swan shoots to international prominence with breaking news about breaking wind. Plus: fresh pain for local papers
The ABC's health editor, Norman Swan, is not just ubiquitous in Australia, he's gone global.
When his daily podcast addressed the topic of farting and the coronavirus last Friday the world's media found it irresistible, with some failing to catch the tongue-in-cheek tone of Swan's original remarks, when he said a fart could spread the virus because it was aerosolised and that we should ban "bare-bottom farting".
"Luckily, we wear a mask, which covers our farts all the time," Swan said referring to the fact we usually wear pants when around other people.
The New York Post relished the topic: "The smell may be hell but the mist could leave you pissed. Two Australian doctors are weighing in about the spread of the coronavirus 'down under' — whether it can be spread through farts, that is."
US conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh took time out from saying the coronavirus was being "weaponised" by the media to bring down Donald Trump, to highlight Swan's comments.
"By the way, my friends, there could be another way of both spreading and acquiring the coronavirus, and we owe this discovery to our great friends in Australia, the Australian Broadcasting Company [sic]," Limbaugh said, before playing an excerpt from Coronacast: "Norman Swan, the doctor, is who says we gotta stop farting, and we gotta stop farting …"
The Toronto Sun said "we have hit a stinky new COVID-19 low" but warned that there was no conclusive study that "ass gas is a COVID threat".
But you know you've really made it internationally when you're featured on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert.
Swan, who was once again targeted by the Australian for allegedly seeking "cash for coronavirus" when an educational video company he is associated with unsuccessfully bid for a government contract, is unfazed by the attention.
"Next to breathing and eating, farting is core to human existence," Swan told Weekly Beast. "But unlike eating and breathing, farting never fails to amuse – unless of course it's too close for comfort.
"At Coronacast we're proud that we've been able to make the world's farting safer. And given the threat of aerosolisation, I'm reminded of one Vietnam War correspondent who claimed: 'Happiness is a dry fart.'"
The New South Wales minister for local government, Shelley Hancock, quietly dropped some new rules for councils last week, apparently designed to give flexibility for councils and ratepayers during the pandemic. But for local newspapers, already struggling if not suspended during the crisis, it was a deadly blow. News Corp has suspended 60 of its community papers and Australian Community Media has stopped printing at least 85 and closed four printing presses.
The government has now removed the requirement for council notices to be advertised in newspapers, instead giving them the option of putting all public notices on their websites.
Helen Dalton, the member for Murray, said the government had effectively robbed regional papers of their last reliable source of revenue.
"Why on earth would they do this now of all times? It's as if they want newspapers to die," Dalton told Weekly Beast. "I've talked to a number of regional editors, and they are very frustrated by the lack of NSW government support and advertising.
"Many elderly residents are not on the internet. How will they stay informed during the pandemic? Murray Darling water corruption, dodgy council decisions, rural hospital downgrades – often these big issues are only scrutinised by rural papers."
A spokesman for News Corp Australia said it was "disappointing" when local government didn't support local media. The community relied on public notices in newspapers for information about their local area, he said.
Hancock's office said the government's hand was forced by the closure of so many papers, and the councils still had the option of advertising with newspapers online or in print if they wished.
"The NSW government will continue to work with local councils to identify, develop and implement more measures to support them and their local communities during the Covid-19 pandemic," Hancock said.
Perhaps proving Turnbull's critique that the Murdoch media "attacks its enemies and protects its friends" News Corp staffers lined up to pour scorn on the former prime minister's memoir, which was published by Hardie Grant this week.
And it wasn't just commentators Troy Bramston, Chris Kenny and Paul Murray who had harsh words for the former prime minister, it was even a theme in the Australian's TV ratings report.
"Malcolm Turnbull's much-hyped interview on ABC's 7.30 television program about his divisive memoir failed to crack the 1 million audience barrier," the Australian's media reporter wrote.
"The former prime minister's lengthy interview about his book, A Bigger Picture, with 7.30 host Leigh Sales was watched by 940,000 metropolitan viewers on Monday night, ranking eighth on the TV ratings table."
Now in fact an audience of close to 1 million in 2020 is a hit in anyone's book.
As ratings guru David Knox from TV Tonight wrote: "ABC's interview with former PM Malcolm Turnbull drew a big audience in what was generally a big night all round."
Yes, the interview was (unsurprisingly) beaten by Nine's reality hit Lego Masters, but the number of people who tuned in for Sales' showdown with Turnbull was significantly up on a usual 7.30 night by some 200,000. When the regional and catch-up audience was factored in it would be well over 1 million.
The Australian's foreign editor Greg Sheridan appeared on the ABC three times in two days: on ABC TV's Insiders on Sunday, ABC Melbourne radio on Monday morning and then as a panelist on The Drum on Monday night. It's a rare media organisation that would repeatedly host a virulent critic who days earlier wrote that the ABC was a "relentless behemoth of unaccountable and vindictive power that persecutes designated enemies in a grievously unfair and unprofessional way".
While Sheridan was given free rein on Insiders to accuse the ABC of using its "giant power" against a single individual – his friend George Pell – he was challenged on some of his assertions on Virginia Trioli's radio program. On Insiders Sheridan said the ABC across its news and current affairs and comedy and entertainment programs was "tremendously unfair to George Pell", and mentioned Tim Minchin's song Come Home (Cardinal Pell).
But the charity song was not an ABC production. Minchin first performed the song publicly on Channel 10's The Project in 2016.
An ABC spokeswoman told Beast the corporation "had nothing to do with satirist Tim Minchin's song Come Home (Cardinal Pell) beyond reporting on it, as did most major news outlets".
"When the song was released in Australia in February 2016 it created much controversy which was clearly newsworthy," she said. "The editorial advice to News and Radio was to use the song carefully and in its news context. Its exposure on the ABC was not excessive."
Trioli challenged him, and asked him if he'd like to "correct the record that the ABC was somehow involved when the ABC wasn't".
Sheridan was mightily affronted and told Trioli she was wrong.
"As ever the ABC has a glass jaw and its personalities like to dish out punishment and to gang up on innocent human beings in a way that constitutes a breach of human rights in this country," Sheridan said before hanging up.
"What was that he said about glass jaws?" Trioli asked.
Ten days after it was taken down, the third episode of the ABC's documentary series Revelation, which includes previously unheard details of allegations against Pell, has been returned to iview.
The episode aired before Pell was freed from prison and had his convictions overturned.
"In response to the high court's decision regarding Cardinal George Pell, the ABC has temporarily removed episode three of Revelation from its platforms while updating its content," a spokesman for the ABC said earlier this month.
On Monday an edited version of the episode went live, with a new opening featuring a piece to camera from Sarah Ferguson about the high court verdict. Footage of Andrew Bolt defending Pell on Sky News is included. But all the original allegations remain.
There's a silver lining in the forced slowdown of TV production due to the coronavirus. The ABC has launched a $5m development fund to "provide urgent and critical support to independent Australian producers and safeguard local content and creativity during these unprecedented times".
With the broadcaster already facing restrictions from looming budget cuts, sources say it has managed to scrape together the cash by saving money on travel and from reduced operating costs on productions due to Covid-19 restrictions.
"The ABC's Fresh Start Fund will support the sustainability and growth of Australia's production industry during the Covid-19 shutdown and supercharge the development of new Australian content for audiences across multiple genres, including drama, comedy, children's, factual, music and the arts," the ABC said.
Readers of the Sydney Morning Herald and the Daily Telegraph may be confused about when the NRL season is going to start.
The animosity between the NRL and free-to-air broadcast partner Nine over when the coronavirus-delayed footy season will kick in again is playing out in the newspapers, with differing takes appearing in the Tele, owned by News Corp, and the SMH, owned by Nine.
While the Herald has the headline: "Channel Nine slams brakes on 'premature' May 28 NRL restart", the Telegraph, owned by News Corp, leads with "Channel 9 Footy Sabotage" and reports that Nine's determination to delay the start is frustrating fans and players alike.
Fox Sports, owned by News Corp, is in dire straits without live sport and has had to lay off staff in recent weeks. The sooner the play resumes the better for News Corp's business model.