Teachers hand deliver lessons to Aboriginal students lacking internet access
Fewer than three out of 15 families in NSW far west have broadband, making digital classrooms unviable
Teachers in far western NSW say they have been hand-delivering lessons to Aboriginal students at home because families don't have reliable access the internet and many don't have computers for their children to work on.
To allow children to keep learning, Wilcannia central school teachers have been making lesson packs for their students and delivering them in person every few days, on a 9km round trip in the school minibus.
Wilcannia, about two hours from Broken Hill on the Darling river, is home to about 800 people, the majority of whom are Barkindji people. The state school caters to about 90 students from pre-school to year 12.
At the beginning of the Covid-19 crisis, teachers surveyed the community to see how many homes were equipped to manage online learning and found that fewer than three out of 15 families had broadband, with the vast majority relying on prepaid 3G or 4G phones for internet access.
People also reported that phone reception was unreliable.
"We don't have NBN. We have just a telephone line connection," deputy principal of primary school, Sarah Donnelley said. "I can't use my mobile phone in my house. As soon as I walk inside, I have no reception and can't send or receive text messages.
"And when the majority of my families rely on prepaid credits and the only internet they have to use at home is what's on their phone, when you can't get reception inside, that makes it tricky for us as educators."
So the teachers did home deliveries – at a socially appropriate distance.
"If there was an activity where kids needed counters, we put together little things of counters and art supplies and made sure that they got everything they needed to complete activities and be successful.
"I know parents across the state are finding that they don't know how to best support their kids, but we couldn't make a video of us doing an activity to upload for our families because they couldn't access it, so we had to think differently about what we were sending home so the kids could be successful and the families could engage successfully."
The NSW Education department will supply students with laptops and internet dongles, which are due to arrive during term two.
"The main priority is how do we provide as much as we can for our students in terms of access and equity," Donnelley said.
"People in decision-making positions have had so much pressure to make quick decisions, and everyone has done their best.
"People should be commended for what they're doing but I think that often, big decisions that have to be made for whole states or our country don't fit little communities like ours."
Telstra said it is working with state governments to provide 20,000 disadvantaged students nationally with free internet access to support online learning and teaching.
But, in the case of Wilcannia's unreliable phone reception, "mobile coverage can be affected by a variety of factors including terrain, trees, buildings and the type of handsets used. Indoor coverage is sometimes particularly impacted by this," Telstra regional general manager, Mike Marom said.
He said for residents living on the fringes of coverage there were a range of aerials or reception boosting devices that could improve mobile voice or data reception.
Donnelley said securing decent reception inside houses is an "important first step".
"If you can't actually get 3G in your house, it doesn't make the [technology] resources very useful in terms of online learning.
"As this continues to go on for longer, it becomes more difficult to keep that connection for all of our kids and all of our staff without internet that can be accessed regularly and within the home, in an environment where the kids are set up to learn," Donnelley said.
"This is a proud place, it's a very special place. Our kids love Wilcannia, and want to be in Wilcannia. So for me, using the internet to show there is a whole world that our kids can access from our classrooms, that's exciting stuff.
"I'm from Sydney so I have colleagues there who are participating in the seamless move to online learning. But it's frustrating when we don't have the infrastructure, or it's not set up for us to just move that way and support our kids in that way," she said.