Ruby Princess crew fear for their health as ship leaves Australia
NSW Labor leader Jodi McKay says crew are worried about contracting coronavirus as the cruise ship sails to the Philippines
Crew on board the Ruby Princess say they are worried for their health and have been "left in the dark" as the virus-hit cruise ship left Australia for the Philippines with about 500 on board.
The ship left Port Kembla just before 5pm on Thursday, after a month in Sydney in which it has been linked to more than 600 cases of coronavirus and 21 deaths among passengers who took its final cruise to New Zealand in March. That cruise, and the decision to allow 2,700 passengers to disembark in Sydney on 19 March, is now the subject of a criminal investigation and a special commission of inquiry.
So far, more than 190 crew have tested positive for Covid-19 and the 1,100 crew have been in varying lengths of quarantine on board for weeks.
The NSW Labor leader, Jodi McKay, said crew members had contacted her saying they did not know where they were going, and it was "a death sentence".
The daughter of one crew member said she feared for her father's health if he were to contract the virus on the ship, as he is a 62-year-old diabetic with heart conditions.
"He's very high risk to get the Covid-19," she wrote on Wednesday. "Yesterday night he cannot sleep because he don't know yet what his result after the swab …. His only wish is that he will be treated in hospital if he ever got the virus.
"I am eight months pregnant now, every night I am praying that my father will come home to us healthy and safe."
Another crew member wrote on Thursday that they had been "left totally in the dark" as the ship was docked in Port Kembla.
"We were never mentioned in any of the onboard announcements for repatriation … I have repeatedly tried to call HR but no answer," they wrote.
"Some nationalities like myself have been left totally in the dark. There is even a repatriation flight leaving to South Africa on the 28th of April but we have been given no option to leave. We have to stay onboard and the company have not even told us where we are sailing to.
"Who knows when I will be able to reach home! Myself and family are worried and scared what will happen next."
McKay said she had been contacted by crew from India, Indonesia, Peru and South Africa all expressing their concerns.
"I don't understand why the welfare of each and every person on the Ruby Princess has not been the priority of the NSW and federal government," she said. "Their plight has touched the hearts of so many Australians. We will continue our advocacy – and as they head into rough seas, they are not alone."
The family of one Filipino crew member told McKay's office that her entire family was worried for his health.
"I am the niece of one of the crew of the Ruby Princess," she wrote. "He is a waiter there … we are deeply worried about his situation. My uncle is very kind, he helped me finish school and he is a bread winner of the family. He also helps my grandfather who is ill, he is the one taking care of my grandfather's medicine."
A spokesman for the Ruby Princess's operator, Carnival Australia, said "there have been announcements on board" telling crew what would happen.
"Around 370 crew members have disembarked today for a charter flight to the Philippines organised by Princess Cruises," he said.
"Around 500 crew, all well, remain on board about half of whom are needed for safe operation of the ship. Ruby Princess will head to the Philippines and we will have more information to share then on crew repatriation.
"We could have disembarked more crew in Port Kembla but they would have needed to stay in shoreside accommodation for a few days before joining a flight and authorities here wouldn't allow this. A small number have remained on board because at this stage there was no flight pathways to get them home due to factors such as closed borders to their home countries."
A spokesperson for NSW police said that the destination of the ship was a matter for Princess Cruises or its operator, Carnival, but that there were intensive care medical facilities on board.
"Commissioner [Mick] Fuller has repeatedly stated that repatriation operation involved close consultation with Princess Cruises and the various consulates of crew members, as well as NSW Health and Aspen Medical to ensure those who remain on board were well enough to make the onward journey," police said.
"That said, the vessel has the equivalent capability of an ICU on board and highly-skilled medical staff.
"The role of the NSW police was to ensure the crew that had flights booked to their home country were moved from the boat to either the airport or a hotel to await that flight."