Fears of second wave of job losses as coronavirus crisis hits Australian building industry
Residential and larger builds are being put on hold while architects report cancelled projects worth $5bn
A second wave of job losses from the coronavirus pandemic could hit the Australian economy as activity in the construction and building industry slows and residential projects dry up.
Tradies are reporting that residential projects are being put on hold as home owners worry about their job security and cash flow, while unions warn that some larger construction projects are being put on ice, particularly in NSW.
Federal Labor estimated on Thursday that new housing starts in the residential sector could fall from 160,000 to 100,000 as people shy away from committing to major projects.
Architects have also reported widespread cancellation of projects.
A survey by the Royal Australian Institute of Architects of 300 architecture practices at the end of March found that 89% had had projects cancelled or put on hold. The survey included both small and medium practices.
The cancelled projects were worth a total of $5bn, the survey found.
"Architecture is always the canary in the coal mine," said RAIA president Helen Lochhead, referring to architects being commissioned at the start of a building process.
The construction and property sector accounts for one in four jobs in NSW and about 8% of GDP, disproportionately larger than in other economies. For this reason, governments have often targeted stimulus packages to the sector because they yield significant flow-on effects through the economy.
The NSW president of the Master Builders Association, Brian Seidler, said a survey of members last week found the coronavirus crisis was starting to affect both large and small projects.
"People are wary about starting a kitchen because they worry that the industry will have to pull up stumps and they are stuck at home," he said.
"It's impacted from the large commercial sector right through to small jobs."
He said the industry had embraced physical distancing rules, given its need to stay open, with the result that there had been only a few cases on building sites.
Labor's housing spokesman, Jason Clare, warned that the slowdown would not become apparent for some time.
"About a million Aussies are involved in building houses for other Aussies, but as construction on houses wraps up over the next few months, the construction pipeline for new work is drying up," Clare said.
"And that means there's a real risk that, for a lot of electricians and plumbers and carpenters around Australia, they could be out of work."
Most large construction sites around the country are still operating, but the national secretary of the Electrical Trades Union, Allen Hicks, warned the coronavirus was having serious impacts.
He said Westfield and Google were among large companies that had put projects on hold in NSW, and more pain was ahead.
"We absolutely support social distancing and we are trying to keep as many workers employed and involved in the industry as we can," he said.
"But most jobs will take longer, and because most contractors have fixed price contracts, it means that if a job takes four months longer because of the rules, contractors will bear the cost of employing people for longer to finish it.
"A lot of companies will go to the wall in three to four months' time," he warned.
Many contractors cannot demonstrate the fall in revenue required to access the jobkeeper program, even though they face serious problems in a few months.
Hicks said that many construction workers were employed as casuals or through labour hire companies and moved between employers, even though they were effectively employed full time.
This meant they would be ineligible for jobkeeper once standdowns occurred because they could not demonstrate 12 months continuous employment with one employer. This meant tradies would be forced onto jobseeker and might be lost to the industry.
On Thursday the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, called on Scott Morrison to consider a major investment in social housing.
"The prime minister has said that we'll have snapback [in the economy]," Albanese said. "The truth is that that won't occur. We won't wake up one morning and be through this crisis and be back to where we were. It needs government support, and we've been reminded during this crisis that government intervention is an essential component of how we deal with our economy."
Both the Victorian and NSW governments have said they are looking at bringing forward "shovel-ready" projects.
The NSW planning minister, Rob Stokes, announced $70m of support for parks and major drainage works in the north west housing areas, and the transport minister, Andrew Constance, has said his department will consider bringing forward transport projects.
On Thursday, Morrison and the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, appeared to downplay the industry's concerns.
Morrison said the best way to keep people off jobkeeper and jobseeker was to "keep the pace up" on projects and that the federal government would work with states to "put the pedal down on future projects".
Frydenberg said: "I saw plenty of construction workers out there with their fluoro vests and hard hats getting to work and I've seen that in my home state of Melbourne as well, so it is good news that many of those construction workers are back at work."