Coronavirus NSW: government sends support staff to Newmarch House aged care home
Three people have died and 28 residents and 14 staff infected at western Sydney facility in the 'eye of a storm' of the NSW outbreak
lThe federal government has offered "unlimited workforce support" to the Covid-19 infected Newmarch House aged care home after staff shortages caused some patients to reportedly go without adequate care.
On Tuesday evening Anglicare said a 92-year-old woman had become the third resident to die after being diagnosed with Covid-19.
At least 28 residents and 14 staff have been infected at Newmarch in the suburb of Caddens.
The home has been put in complete lockdown, with many staff in self-isolation.
"Over 55 staff … are just totally taken out of the equation. And we're really scratching around to have adequate staff there," Anglicare CEO Grant Millard told the ABC.
Family members of residents have spoken out about the problems their relatives have been having getting treatment.
Anthony Bowe told Seven News that his mother didn't receive timely medical attention after she fell in the shower.
He said his mother tested positive for Covid-19 last Wednesday, and the next day waited two hours for nurses after calling for help.
In a statement, Millard said the facility was in the "eye of a storm".
"Everyone is struggling to find staff for us, including the commonwealth government and eight agencies. On some days we struggle to have a full staff complement, and it's no one's fault," he said.
Millard said the staffing shortage had affected the care provided to the residents.
"We are deeply sorry for the effect that it has had on some of the people we look after and that they have had to wait for the care they deserve during this crisis. Under normal circumstances, Newmarch has had an excellent reputation for the care of our residents.
The federal government has now stepped in, activating a "surge workforce" including deploying an emergency response team through Aspen Medical, the private health company that assisted crew members on the Ruby Princess.
"We understand the concerns from families regarding their loved ones," federal minister for aged care Richard Colbeck said. "We are listening and acting on advice during this challenging and unprecedented event."
He said the workforce also includes "a first nurse responder to assess the staffing requirements, registered nurses, allied health professionals and personal care workers".
Colbeck said the Department of Health, the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission, NSW Health and Anglicare were working to coordinate and deliver an effective response.
"The government has provided and is fast-tracking access to personal protective equipment to ensure the safety of residents and staff," Colbeck said.
On Wednesday deputy chief medical officer Paul Kelly said the government would offer "unlimited workforce support" to assist Anglicare care for patients.
Millard
Millard said NSW Health was testing residents every day.
Matthew Fowler's father, Lionel, is a resident at Newmarch. He initially tested negative to Covid-19, but Matthew said he was terrified his father might just be in the incubation period of the virus. On Wednesday Lionel was awaiting the results from a subsequent round of tests.
"I'm just paralysed with worry," Fowler said. "I couldn't get out of bed until after lunch yesterday. I just broke down."
Fowler said he was disappointed in how Anglicare had handled the outbreak, even though his father was happy with the care he was receiving. Fowler has lodged a formal complaint with the NSW Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission.
"This is a black-box scenario I don't know what it's like [in the home] … since the start, there has been a lack of timely, coordinated, compassionate communication and that's been quite frustrating."
Fowler has been able to speak to his father over the phone but has not yet been able to get a carer to help his father set up a Facetime call.
Fowler is worried his father would not survive the virus if he was infected.
"I think to a certain extent he is resigned to it. When you go into aged care like that, you're in effect waiting for God."
Since Anglicare is associated with the Anglican church, Fowler said he wanted to see the archbishop become involved.
"You know, if this Christian ethos of Anglicare is real and not just for show, then the archbishop should be showing much more leadership … he should be making himself much more available."
Guardian Australia has contacted the Anglican diocese of Sydney for comment.
Late on Wednesday Anglicare released a statement in response to family concerns.
"We are grateful the commonwealth government has been working closely with us to find the best staff across the sector to provide us with the high levels of care all our residents have come to expect under normal circumstances," Millard said.
"We will talk to those families who have raised their concerns and we will invite family representatives to a conference with us and the commonwealth health department tomorrow to make sure their concerns are answered."
It is understood the outbreak at Newmarch House began after a staff member, unaware she had Covid-19, worked six shifts while infected and showing extremely minor symptoms.
"She's obviously fairly distraught about what is happening on the ground," Millard said.
"We've supplied chaplaincy support, our employee assistance program counselling, and we're keeping in contact with her."
A spokesperson for NSW Health said that while they have provided health-related services and support, the responsibility for providing additional aged care staff rests with the federal government.
"NSW Health provides health-related services and support … [including] medical intervention, testing, advice and contact tracing however, it would not extend to daily living tasks provided by aged care workers."
NSW Health is also providing some "hospital at home" services to the facility.
On 27 April 2020 the photograph on this article was changed. The previous image showed the neighbouring retirement village.