Just how certain is the NRL's 'definite' return date of 28 May?
While most sports take a wait-and-see approach, the NRL has put a cross in the calendar to resume play. But there are many questions that first need to be answered
Where there's a will, there's a way. It is a motto ARLC chairman Peter V'landys has seeping through his veins and oozing out of his pores. It is now very much the driving force behind the NRL and its urgency to get the show back on the road.
While most sports are willing to take a wait-and-see approach, the NRL has pursued a relentless drive to resume competition and has now settled on 28 May. Patience is not a virtue V'landys possesses. He is a believer in the old Gough Whitlam aphorism: crash through or crash. He also doesn't believe in crashing.
There are plenty of details still to be sorted though. Here is where we are now.
Will the NRL start on 28 May?28 May was announced as the intended return date for the NRL, amongst much derision and skepticism when first declared as the goal of the league. But this has been confirmed as the date with Wayne Pearce, who is leading the Project Apollo committee to bring about the game's return, saying it was "definite" the NRL would be back then. The Sydney Morning Herald reported on Thursday, though, that contingencies are in place to start the competition as late as 11 June with New Zealand Warrriors' ability to enter and then train in Australia the primary issue. Training is set to be given the all-clear from 4 May.
How long will the season run? The specifics of the competition and its machinations will not be known until an agreement is reached with the NRL's broadcast partners, Fox Sports and Nine. All are in negotiations about redoing their deals with an eye to taking advantage of the current situation to reduce their spend on the NRL. One major issue is the length of the season, with Fox Sports pushing for as close to the full schedule as possible while Nine, which has stated previously it does not want the season to go ahead, is advocating for a shortened season so as not to overlap with cricket's T20 World Cup, to which Nine has broadcast rights. The cancellation of the latter would no doubt shift Nine's position. One senior club official believes a 20-round competition that would play into November is the most likely scenario.
What will the competition look like?Some certainties have been announced. Competition points from the opening two rounds will remain. The premiership structure will not change to a conference system as was proposed. There will be no back-to-back games at the same venue for the foreseeable future. All matches are likely to be played at Sydney venues ANZ Stadium and Bankwest Stadium to start the season. There will be no crowds to start with and the season is likely to run its course without fans until at least the finals.
Has the NSW government endorsed the NRL's return?While Wednesday's announcement from Pearce was seen as a major step towards a competition restart, the NSW government has not changed its position with a spokesman stating that "public health orders do not prohibit the NRL from re-starting". This is hardly a ringing endorsement of a 28 May return but by the same token the NSW government doesn't seem likely to prevent big-time rugby league returning if health and safety protocols are successfully administered.
What medical protocols will be in place?The venue edict will be part of a series of strict biosecurity protocols that the NRL is set to enforce to ensure the competition is relaunched and remains ongoing. Contention remains, though, as to what these measures will be and how they will stack up with public orders, with a NSW government spokesman stating that "the NRL has sought its own health advice". There will be stadium sanitisation before and after games. While details of what the protocols will entail have not been announced, V'landys stated that "player, staff and officials' health and safety would be the priority and we would base the rules on the advice of experts". One clear position is that the NRL will work to strictly enforce the protocols to ensure the game remains viable. "There will be sanctions … there must be a deterrent because one reckless act will bring down an entire competition," V'landys said. It has been reported that teams could be deducted competition points while the NRL will send independent spies to clubs to test biosecurity protocols.
What will happen with the Warriors and interstate teams? At this stage, the Warriors have been given exemption to travel from New Zealand but they have not yet been given an exemption to arrive in Australia. The players would be required to undertake a 14-day quarantine but the club and the NRL are exploring an option of sequestering the Warriors at a Lennox Heads training facility that will allow the team to remain quarantined while training. The Warriors will need this to come to fruition if they are to resume training at the same time as the 15 Australian clubs. This has still yet to be approved and it is not yet known which Warriors players will make the journey, knowing they will be apart from their families for an extended period. Pearce stated that all non-NSW clubs would "have to come to camp in NSW" as of Wednesday but that "the landscape is changing pretty quickly". The Victorian government has said it would not allow Storm players to train together in the state, meaning they would need to cross the border to do so. The Queensland government was vocal in its opposition to a restart and premier Annastacia Palaszczuk wants clarification from the NRL before giving the green light. It seems unlikely games will be played north of the Tweed. Queensland clubs, however, are working on being able to return after playing games in Sydney.