Library coronavirus lockdown cuts off disadvantaged Australians from digital world
They are a lifeline for those who can't afford internet, and there are calls for them to be treated as an essential service
There are concerns the closure of public libraries as part of the coronavirus lockdown is cutting disadvantaged Australians off from the digital world.
For Marie*, who did not want to use her real name, life has become a lot harder since her local library in Geelong closed.
"It might seem like a small thing to some people, but for some of us it's the absolute world. It's my connection to the world," said the 48-year-old, who has qualifications in environmental science but is currently unemployed.
Marie can't afford a home internet connection and has been using the wifi at her local McDonald's to send job applications since the lockdown began.
"For me, to go to my library, it's to go somewhere and still have purpose," she said. "Even though I don't have the internet at home, I can go to the library and still feel I'm contributing. And I've lost that. It's frustrating."
Kiersten Fishburn, the chief executive officer of Liverpool City Council in Western Sydney, is calling for libraries to be treated as an essential service and reopened with physical distancing in place.
Many people in her local council area rely on the library to use the internet, submit government forms and keep in touch with family, she told Guardian Australia.
"There is a huge digital divide across Western Sydney. We are effectively cutting off the most disadvantaged members of our community – from their studies, from valuable government assistance and from their loved ones" she said.
"The longer we keep our library branches closed, the deeper and more entrenched that digital divide will become."
Public libraries were closed, along with museums and galleries, as part of the nationwide lockdown on 25 March. Since then, the closure has been enforced by public health orders under state and territory governments.
ABS figures show that only 86% of households are connected to the internet, with 2.6 million Australians not online.
According to the 2019 digital inclusion index, household income was the biggest indicator of digital disadvantage, and there was "a substantial digital divide between richer and poorer Australians".
Paul Thomas, an expert on Australia's digital divide from RMIT University, says libraries provide a critical service. About 4 million Australians have mobile-only access to the internet, but are unable to complete more complex tasks, such as applying for welfare or submitting job applications, without a personal computer.
Thomas says schemes such as the Victorian government's to connect the homes of school students to the NBN are important, but that libraries are the only service addressing digital disadvantage across the community in the longer term.
"Without those kinds of measures and more of them, we end up with a more stratified internet. We will have an internet for people who are relatively well off, and then we have a less available internet for a substantial amount of the population who are less well off."
"It is becoming more critical very quickly that we do as much as we can to narrow the digital divide," he said.
Cameron Morley, who oversees public library services at the State Library of NSW, one of the government bodies tasked with determining when libraries will be permitted to reopen, said the decision would ultimately be made by councils in line with the state health orders.
"NSW public libraries are very busy public places that attract over 35 million visits per annum, so under the current circumstances compliance with health orders is necessary," he said in a statement.
For Marie, reopening local libraries on a limited basis would be a vital concession.
"You walk into a library any day of the week, you're just going to see the people that need the service. It's the vulnerable people," she said.
"Really, there's not as much traffic as you might think. Maybe just open the library without storytime."
*Name changed to protect anonymity.