Labor and Greens to oppose Coalition's 'dangerous' workplace regulation changes
Proposed changes by the industrial relations minister, Christian Porter, allows employers to change workers' deals with just 24 hours' notice
Labor and the Greens will push to disallow a regulation by the industrial relations minister, Christian Porter, slashing the consultation period for changes to deals setting workers' pay and conditions.
The regulation, announced on Thursday, allows employers to provide just 24 hours' notice, down from a week, to seek wide-ranging changes including cuts to pay, penalty rates, leave entitlements and changes to ordinary hours of work.
The change was welcomed by business groups as a means to improve flexibility with workers' agreement at a time of economic crisis, but the Australian Council of Trade Unions warned it will lead to reductions in pay and undermine job security.
On Monday, the Labor shadow cabinet decided to move to disallow the regulation in the Senate, which is likely to return in May according to comments by Scott Morrison on Thursday.
However, even with Greens support Labor will need four votes from the remaining crossbench bloc of two Centre Alliance senators, two from One Nation and Jacqui Lambie.
Centre Alliance senator, Rex Patrick, told Guardian Australia his party would give "serious consideration" to supporting the disallowance because 24 hours' notice was "not sufficient access".
"Asking someone to see an agreement, appreciate the proposed changes, make representations and consider campaigning on the issue … One day is way too short, it's not reasonable."
In a statement, the shadow industrial relations minister, Tony Burke, said Labor will move to disallow the "dangerous" change, which he warned would see workers vote on complex changes before consulting their colleagues and union.
"Labor recognises the need to move quickly to vary awards during the coronavirus crisis in order to keep people in jobs when businesses are doing it tough," he said.
"But this regulation tips the balance too far in employers' favour.
"All businesses will be able to take advantage of this change, not just those experiencing a significant downturn."
The consultation period will revert to one week in six months, but Labor is concerned that changes to workers pay and conditions can be baked into agreements for up to three years.
On Thursday, Porter said the changes would still require a vote of approval by workers and the employer will need to show the Fair Work Commission there is "genuine agreement".
He said the change was necessary to give "employers greater flexibility to rapidly respond to the extreme and urgent workplace challenges caused by the Covid-19 pandemic".
Greens leader, Adam Bandt, accused the government of "using a temporary emergency to make long-term changes to workers' rights"."There is no evidence this change is needed, especially given the high degree of cooperation witnessed during this crisis," he said."People need a fair amount of time to seek advice about significant changes to their rights and the Greens will oppose this corporate power grab."
The Australian Industry Group chief executive, Innes Willox, said the regulation would "enable the changes to be implemented without delay".
"Many enterprise agreements were reached in better times and contain provisions which are impeding businesses in responding to the Covid-19 crisis," he said.
Willox said changes could include delaying or cancelling future wage increases, more flexible working hours, giving employers the right to direct employees to take accrued leave and removing restrictions on part-time employment.
The Business Council of Australia welcomed the changes to provide them "maximum flexibility", suggesting that for many large businesses unable to access the $130bn jobkeeper wage subsidy program the ability to change workplace deals "will be even more valuable".
But ACTU secretary, Sally McManus, said the changes will "allow employers to ram through reductions in pay and undermine job security".
"This change effectively takes away [consultation] rights leaving workers exposed to employers seeking to exploit the fear caused by the pandemic and to pressure workers into rushed agreements, locking out their access to advice."