New Zealand Warriors may base themselves in Australia for rugby league competition
Chief executive says international travel restrictions biggest hurdle but 'we're ambitious about being there'
The New Zealand Warriors' chief executive, Cameron George, hopes the NRL team can arrive in Australia in time to resume training with rival clubs on 4 May.
The league still plans to relaunch its season in late May and held meetings with broadcasters on Friday.
It remains unclear how many games will be played and how much the networks will be willing to pay for a restructured competition. However, all parties are aiming for a return to action on 28 May, with teams pencilled in to start squad runs in just 16 days.
International travel restrictions on both sides of the Tasman are a significant hurdle for the Warriors.
They also want answers on a number of questions – including player renumeration, competition structure, and whether families will also be able to be housed with the team – before deciding whether to stay in Australia for up to seven months.
"Once that comes to light, we'll be better equipped to make the right decision," George told Fox Sports News on Saturday.
"And then we get to Australia, we can train with every other club from 4 May on. That's our goal, notwithstanding a lot of water to go under the bridge.
"We're very ambitious about being there and share the optimism with everyone else around that this game can get off the ground on 28 May."
If the Warriors are granted an exemption to fly into Australia, they will probably be forced into a two-week isolation period.
However, there is a push for them to train in isolation, with the NSW far north coast town of Lennox Head mentioned as a possible location.
George said all options were on the table, but understanding the restrictions during isolation was the key.
"When we do that, we'll certainly be in a position to understand where we should be located, and for how long," George said.
"It also depends on whether the interstate borders remain shut. There's no use being too far away from Sydney if we can't play in Queensland."
The NRL will want to finalise discussions with broadcasters early next week before its innovations committee meets on Wednesday.
"Myself and 15 other CEOs of the clubs are looking to get that information, drop it into our business models, and pan out what our future looks like in the next six months," George said.
Meanwhile the AFL chief executive, Gillon McLachlan, said Victoria was still a viable option to host a quarantine hub as the league edged closer to restarting the 2020 season.
Western Australia, South Australia and Queensland had been viewed as key states in the hub plan, which would see teams split into three groups and isolated in different states to limit their exposure to Covid-19.
"Victoria has extraordinary proximate facilities, so there are obviously opportunities, like there are in every state to various levels," McLachlan told Fox Footy on Saturday.