Committee to review Australia's coronavirus response expects 'maximum cooperation'
Chair Katy Gallagher says she expects highest level of transparency, with little tolerance for 'obfuscation'
The new Senate select committee examining the Australian government response to Covid-19 expects "maximum cooperation" from ministers and public servants invited to appear before it, chair Katy Gallagher has warned.
Gallagher told Guardian Australia the committee will be "atypical" because it will steer clear of "political grandstanding" that can characterise some other inquiries – but in return she expects the highest level of transparency, with little tolerance for "obfuscation" from witnesses.
"I'm determined that we won't be pushed aside or patted on the head by the government – this committee has significant powers, it's a very big job, one supported by the entire Senate, and we intend to do a very thorough job with the task we've been given," she said.
The Senate select committee was set up with the broadest possible terms of reference earlier in April, when the government adjourned parliament until 11 August despite Labor's calls to continue regular sittings to allow legislative oversight of executive action. On Thursday, Scott Morrison said parliament could meet earlier than August and was considering a trial week in May.
Gallagher said the committee will "allow a level of transparency and scrutiny that otherwise wouldn't be there".
On Thursday the committee agreed to hold public hearings twice weekly to begin as early as next week, with the health response to Covid-19 an early focus before moving on to the economic response. Gallagher said this will include examination of its "adequacy" and "those excluded" from $300bn in government spending and loans.
Asked about how prepared Australia was to respond to the pandemic and the handling of the Ruby Princess incident, Gallagher said the issues were "legitimate questions we will pursue" but declined to express preliminary views.
Gallagher will chair meetings from Canberra while up to 10 senators and witnesses appear by video link and the rest by audio link.
Like workplaces all over Australia, the department of the Senate and the committee secretariat are working to avoid a "logistical nightmare" of senators coming and going in hearings, and to provide public access to telecasts.
Gallagher said at first proceedings will work like Senate estimates hearings, applying scrutiny to and providing a "conduit for information" from officials to the public, but the inquiry will also have "ample opportunity" to receive broader input from stakeholders and community members.
Gallagher said the Senate has "significant powers" and there is "nothing to stop us asking about national cabinet decisions from the lens of the federal government" – but the inquiry is unlikely to consider how states implemented those decisions, unless they elect to participate.
Asked if the inquiry will call the chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, and the secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Gallagher said the committee would apply scrutiny to the "highest level of officials".
"We don't want everything taken on notice because the right people are not at the table – I would expect the tolerance for obfuscation, or not providing fullest answers, will be limited."
Gallagher warned the inquiry is "not going to be very effective if ministers don't cooperate, or public servants handle it in the way that some typical Senate hearings are conducted" by taking questions on notice.
"We need maximum cooperation and buy-in for this inquiry in the national interest – and I note this committee was established with the support of the government."
The Liberal senator James Paterson is the deputy chair of the Covid-19 response Senate select committee, which also includes Labor's Kristina Keneally and Murray Watt, Green Rachel Siewert, Nationals senator Perin Davey and independent Jacqui Lambie.
On 8 April, Paterson said that "parliamentary scrutiny remains important in times of crisis".
"Given the extraordinary measures governments have been required to implement to tackle Covid-19, it is more important than ever before," he said.
"I look forward to playing my role in that process on behalf of all Australians."