Call for Australia to ban payday lending until coronavirus crisis ends
Exclusive: Stop the Debt Trap Alliance wants temporary ban on high-interest loans, but providers deny they are using Covid-19 to drum up business
More than 30 consumer and community organisations have called for a ban on payday lending during the coronavirus crisis, which some high-interest credit providers have been using to promote their products.
The call, from organisations including the Consumer Action Law Centre, the Salvation Army and the Australian Council of Social Service, came as a court upheld moves by the corporate regulator to ban loans that used a legal loophole to charge extremely high interest.
The Stop the Debt Trap Alliance said the Australian community was already at "crisis point" due to high household debt and said payday lenders, which can charge interest rates of more than 400%, were ready to take advantage as unemployment numbers skyrocket.
It said 1.77m households took out more than 4.7m payday loans between April 2016 and July last year.
"With thousands more set to lose work over the coming months, these loan sharks will be rubbing their hands together,' the alliance said.
"Our financial counsellors are worried and anticipate a deluge of people with payday loan and rent-to-buy-related debt as a result of the Covid-19 emergency.
"There's only one course of action if the government wants to help people keep their heads above water: pause all payday lending and rent-to-buy activity for at least six months."
In one marketing text seen by Guardian Australia, lender Jacaranda Finance, which charges interest of up to 140% a year, said that "coronavirus has made getting approved for a loan hard". The company, which corporate records show is owned and controlled by Queensland man Daniel Wessels, suggests in the text that would-be borrowers use their car as security to improve their chances of approval.
Wessels defended the text message as "empirical" and rejected the term "payday lender".
"There are a multitude of compliant and heavily regulated credit providers out there to whom this term is repugnant," he told Guardian Australia.
"Due to the retraction of credit across all sectors of the financial ecosystem, it has never been more important for reputable and responsible lenders like Jacaranda to offer our services."
Another lender, Perth-based Cash Now, says on its website that "amidst the Covid-19 situation, we are still open and will still be here to help". It charges interest of up to 430% a year.
"As our office is physically closed due to the Covid-19 crisis, the message is there simply to inform clients that we are still open during this period because we received many calls from our clients to check if we are still open for business," manager Patrick Cheow said.
"We are not using the pandemic to promote our business."
The Stop the Debt Alliance said that for people who were unable to pay for essentials such as food and rent, high-interest loans were "a recipe for financial disaster".
"They market themselves as a stop-gap for people caught in a tight spot, but this business model – with its high fees and eye-watering interest rates – relies on exploiting people and forcing them to take out loan after loan after loan."
The consumer groups also welcomed a legal victory by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission against Gold Coast company Cigno.
In September, Asic used new powers to ban an arrangement where, at the same time as taking out a loan, a borrower agreed to pay large introduction fees to a related company.
This had the effect of sidestepping laws capping the amount of interest that could be charged on small amount loans.
Cigno challenged the ban in the federal court but on Wednesday judge Angus Stewart ruled in favour of the regulator.
He said laws allowing Asic to ban products should be read broadly because it was designed to prevent consumer detriment.
Cigno, which corporate records show is controlled by former rugby union player Mark Swanepoel, acted as an introducer to another company controlled by members of the Swanpoel family, Gold-Silver Standard Finance.
In one case cited by the judge, a woman borrowed $120 from Gold-Silver Standard Finance in a loan arranged by Cigno.
Cigno charged a $90 "financial supply fee" and $5.95 a week in "account-keeping fees", while Gold-Silver Standard Finance charged a credit fee of $6.
The total to be repaid was $263.60, but the woman could not afford to make repayments of $66 a fortnight and immediately defaulted.
"She was charged various dishonour fees and ongoing weekly account-keeping fees," Stewart said.
"As a result, she became liable to repay $1,189 on the original amount of $120, or 990% more than she borrowed."
Cigno did not respond to Guardian Australia's questions.
The Consumer Action Law Centre chief executive, Gerard Brody, said Asic "must not hesitate to crack down on businesses that rip off people in such a blatant way".
"Exploitative lenders that target people in hardship and drive them deep into debt have no place in our community," he said.