Victoria brushes aside PM's calls to send children back to school for term two
Patchwork approach to education to be taken as Victoria, Queensland and ACT to deliver teaching remotely while NSW sets out other plans
The Victorian government has stared down calls to send children back to school in term two, as Scott Morrison acknowledged parents should listen to state premiers rather than national leaders on the issue of school attendance.
Despite Morrison and the federal education minister, Dan Tehan, arguing for schools to resume in-person attendance, the prime minister emerged from national cabinet on Thursday with a set of principles recognising states' autonomy rather than a nationally consistent approach.
The patchwork approach of state differences is set to continue for the foreseeable future, with New South Wales aiming to resume more in-person attendance by 11 May but Victoria, Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory continuing remote learning in term two.
Morrison told reporters in Canberra the principles recognised "education is best delivered by professional teachers to students in the classroom on a school campus".
But the principles state that "during the Covid-19 crisis, alternative flexible, remote delivery of education services may be needed".
The principles also acknowledge that "state and territory governments and non-government sector authorities are responsible for managing and making operational decisions for their school systems", although Tehan has used funding conditions to require independent schools to reopen.
While the principles noted the Australia Health Principal Protection Committee has advised that "attendance at a school campus for education represents a very low risk to students", they also said decisions could be made on "state-based public health and education advice".
Morrison denied being frustrated by the inconsistency between states, arguing the principles "set out very clearly what we all agree and what we are working towards".
"Parents should follow the instructions that are being provided by state premiers and state education ministers," he said. "If you are going to school in Victoria, there is only one person you need to listen to and that is the premier of Victoria."
Earlier on Thursday, the NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, supported Morrison's position by announcing the state would encourage more children to undertake face-to-face learning from week three of term two, from 11 May.
The move is likely to include staged resumption of regular schooling for year 12 and kindergarten children first, as advocated by the NSW Teachers Federation.
On Thursday, the Victorian education minister, James Merlino, reiterated that Victoria planned for public school education to be delivered remotely for term two, unless and until medical advice in that state changed.
Merlino cited the fact just 3% of public school students in Victoria attended in person on the first day of term two on Wednesday as evidence the message to Victorian parents had been "crystal clear".
"The message from Victoria has been clear and consistent: if you can learn from home, you must learn from home, and that message has been understood and heeded. We don't want a million students, 80,000 teachers … congregating around our schools. This is about social distancing and it is working."
Later, Morrison suggested Victoria's concerns about physical distancing could be alleviated by rules for "very careful" interactions between parents on school drop-offs and pickups.
"I don't think that's not something beyond the wit of most parents and schools," he said, suggesting parents could remain in the car while depositing children.
Morrison said he would send his own children back to school "in a heartbeat" if they were to be taught "by a teacher" rather than to "sit at a school hall and look at the internet".
Labor's education spokeswoman, Tanya Plibersek, said Morrison "should never have confused this issue by giving mixed messages to parents".
Throughout March the federal government opposed closures on the basis of medical advice that children are at low risk from attending school, but the issue was forced by Victoria bringing forward its school holidays, and other states and territories introducing pupil-free days to prepare for online learning.
The Queensland government favours remote learning for term two but will reassess at the halfway mark of the term, around 15 May.
The principles also called on states and territories to ensure schools were safe working environments, in recognition that reopening schools is a greater risk to the safety of teachers, particularly in higher risk groups such as those of advanced age and with underlying medical conditions.