Care home data secrecy puts profits before lives
The suppression of information about Covid-19 deaths in individual homes shows the care sector should never be run for commercial interests, writes Prof Alan Walker. Plus letters from Dr Mike Sheaff, Graham Murphy and Les Bright
While the death rates of individual care homes are obviously not sufficient to provide a full assessment, as the Care Quality Commission says, they are nonetheless a vital indicator of safety, especially while Covid-19 rages (Data on Covid care home deaths kept secret 'to protect commercial interests', 27 August).
To hide such essential information from older people and their relatives is both immoral and a denial of their human rights, a stance that no quality regulator should be party to. This latest revelation tells us that the commercial control of care services must end.
The policy of privatisation was originally sold, by the first Thatcher government, as the creation of a "cottage industry". It is now dominated by big businesses which, to maximise profits, maintain large units at unsafe occupancy levels, with few staff. Now the regulator, which is there to protect frail residents, has taken it upon itself to favour the commercial interests of providers. The re-nationalisation of care homes is long overdue and a new, genuinely independent regulator is required.  Alan Walker Professor of social policy and social gerontology, University of Sheffield
You report that England and Scotland's social care regulators refused disclosure of information about care home deaths.
Assuming this refusal uses the exemption of "prejudice to commercial interests" under section 43 (2) of the Freedom of Information Act, I hope a challenge will be made. As a "qualified exemption", subject to a public interest test, the information commissioner offers this advice: "If a public authority is a regulator, it may hold commercially sensitive information about the quality of a product or the practices of an organisation. There are strong public interest arguments in allowing access to information which will help protect the public from unsafe products or dubious practices. This would potentially override any considerations of prejudice to the commercial interests of a company."
Written long before the current pandemic, this surely has even greater relevance now. Dr Mike Sheaff  Associate professor in sociology, University of Plymouth
A friend of mine with severe dementia recently moved into a care home that, we were told, has been Covid-free. If, for commercial reasons, the regulators are colluding with providers to keep Covid deaths secret, how do we know if this was the truth? With the suppression of the truth by a self-gagged regulator, I cannot imagine anyone can now prevent the compilation and publication of unofficial league tables concerning this matter of life and death. It is a legitimate activity in the public interest. Graham Murphy  Liverpool
The care sector regulators exist to regulate the quality provided by registered services, mostly care homes and home care services. They set and uphold standards and report on performance. Inspection reports are not simply another set of bureaucratic hurdles to be cleared and ignored – they ensure the safety and welfare of hundreds of thousands of frail and elderly people, and help families to make sensitive decisions.
It is therefore a dereliction of duty to decide that commercial matters should take precedence over providing consumers with the fullest information on care homes. If there are fears for the viability of organisations providing care, the government could act decisively to reshape the sector by the judicious use of public funds, as has happened with the furlough scheme and the eating out subsidy. Les Bright  Exeter, Devon