Hit-and-miss Covid testing is frustrating
The home-testing process left Martin Payne enraged, a contact tracer writes of having very little to do, while Nathalie Newton-Young is worried about the lack of checks at airports. John Pullan, however, had a positive experience of the testing service
Dr Alan Gadian was understandably furious that no Covid-19 home-testing kit was available (Letters, 24 August), but he might have been equally enraged had he received one. The instruction booklet in my kit said that I had to identify a priority postbox via a Royal Mail website, but the diagram showing how to do this bore no resemblance to the site the link took me to, and I had to drive around to find such a postbox.
The booklet said I must register my kit, but the website address given failed to go to a registration page. I rang 119 and the person who answered did not give the information, but instead asked me for the personal details I had already supplied when applying for the kit. Only at the end of this long process did he explain that he had now registered me.
I received my test result eight days after posting the kit, because laboratories are running behind (Coronavirus home test kits 'run out' in England and Scotland, 24 August).Martin PayneNorwich
I concur that the system is a shambles. I have done more than 100 hours of work as a contact tracer employed by NHS professionals to carry out interviews with those who have a positive test result. During this time, I have done one interview and made two phone calls, so I was surprised to read that another tracer, Wendy Roger, had made several calls to those returning from holiday. I am perplexed as to why I am being paid to do nothing and the government continues to invest billions in what seems like an ineffective service.Name and address supplied
My son returned last Sunday to Gatwick on an easyJet flight from Lyon. None of the passengers were subject to any checks on arrival or given forms to fill in their identity or onward destinations. How many other passengers will slip through this pitiful system?Nathalie Newton-YoungBognor Regis, West Sussex
I'm no fan of this government but I was pleased with the testing service. I had symptoms on Sunday night. On Monday morning, I went on to the gov.uk website and had a choice of venues and times for that day. I travelled four miles to Manchester City stadium and waited 10 minutes for the test. Less than 13 hours later I got an email that I was negative. John PullanManchester