Metropolitan police drop investigation into anti-racism protester
Force backs down, conceding Ken Hinds' planned march was exempt from Covid rules
The Metropolitan police have backed down on a threat to investigate the organiser of an antiracism protest for attempting to stage an unlawful gathering under coronavirus regulations, after accepting that as a political protest it was exempt.
Police wrote to Ken Hinds, a community activist based in Haringey, north London, after he asked them to help facilitate a protest march from Notting Hill to Hyde Park on Sunday, warning him that by merely publicising the protest he may have already broken the law.
After an urgent legal challenge accusing the Met of discrimination, a lawyer for the force wrote again to admit that Hinds and his organisation, Communities Against Violence, did fit the criteria of a "political body", as outlined under the regulations.
The letter said Hinds was the first protest organiser to claim the exemption, implying that the force had not taken this into consideration when policing demonstrations that had taken place since the regulations had come into force six weeks ago.
The Met's disclosure could mean that fixed penalty notices given to people taking part in recent demonstrations could be challenged as unlawful.
Lochlinn Parker, of ITN solicitors, who represented Hinds, said: "This case has clarified that protests called by campaign organisations are not unlawful gatherings, as long the group has completed an adequate assessment of the public health risks of the protest.
"People need to be aware of the coronavirus regulations and be prepared to stand up for their article 10 and 11 rights [freedom of expression and freedom of assembly] to protest even in these extraordinary times."
Hinds was one of a number of organisers calling for people to join the Million People March on Sunday, which would have been the first day of the Notting Hill carnival in west London.
"We are incorporating the carnival spirit, which is to celebrate emancipation from slavery and also to express what freedom means to us as a minority," the group say on their website.
Hinds told the Guardian he was pleased at the Met's decision to row back on its threat, and that he had written to the force to again seek its cooperation in facilitating the protest.
"I'm relieved with the decision not to prosecute me because my whole purpose of doing this was to bring people into a safe space and for them to return home safely, leaving in an orderly manner," he said. "But I can't do it alone, we need the police support."
The Met's reversal came shortly before rules came into force on Friday imposing fines of up to £10,000 on people organising unlawful gatherings of 30 or more people.The increased penalties followed a surge in the numbers of illegal raves around the country, as people sought opportunities to gather after the closure of nightclubs. However, protests could also be affected if organisers are unable to argue that they meet the grounds for an exemption under coronavirus regulations.