Face masks in schools: what are the best coverings for children?
Parents in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland are rushing to buy masks for pupils
A government U-turn on face mask advice for schools means secondary pupils in communal areas will be expected to wear face coverings in local lockdown areas of England, leaving parents scrambling to get masks for their children. In Scotland and Northern Ireland, all secondary pupils must wear them in public areas such as corridors and school buses from Monday.
With so many available, here is a rundown of the different kinds of masks available and what they offer schoolchildren.
With one-use disposable masks, if used properly and disposed of daily, the costs would soon mount. Instead, machine washable and reusable coverings may be a better alternative. These are widely available with two or three layers of breathable fabric. Etsy, Trouva and other online retailers offer a wide range. Some will include a small pocket for the insertion of a replaceable filter to give an extra layer of protection. Some manufacturers are offering coverings made from antibacterial silver ion fabric, though this does not guarantee extra protection against the Covid-19 virus. Coverings with valves also do not offer added protection. Those with a toggle strap will ensure the snuggest – therefore safest – fit. A face mask storage case will ensure it is kept clean between use.
Headteachers may favour plain masks, possibly matching the school uniform, if there is one. There is a multitude of washable plain masks available online – Marks &amp; Spencer specialises in masks that fit children and are uniform-compliant. One problem if face coverings are required to be of uniform colour is the risk of getting them mixed up with that of another pupil. Overcome this by ordering a custom mask with personalised initials or names, or embroider them yourself.
With disposable masks adding to the litter problem and plastic pollution, look out for cloth masks made from off-cuts of natural fibres, including tencel, linen and organic cotton. All the better for being handmade, and responsibly sourced. Vegan-friendly will be a top priority for some young people. Ethical brands and websites have been at the forefront of promoting products kinder to people and to the planet.
For pupils with a well-developed social consciousness, this is an opportunity to support and promote worthwhile causes and organisations. Many charities are producing face coverings as a way of fundraising. When Scotland's first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, wore a Homeless Tartan mask, made for the homelessness charity Shelter by kiltmakers Slanj, there was an immediate surge in demand. The artist Ai WeiWei produced 10,000 masks, to be sold on eBay to generate funds for Human Rights Watch, Refugees International and Médecins Sans Frontières.
Teenagers will find no shortage of celebrity face covering to emulate. The designer Tory Burch set up a social media campaign – #wearadamnmask challenge – which went viral, featuring A-list stars in masks, with details of where to buy similar coverings. Jennifer Lopez sported a sparkly pink sequined number. The actor Jennifer Aniston opted for a minimalist no-frills all-black covering, while the TV presenter Christine Lampard has showcased a plain mask decorated with a pair of bold hot pink lips.
If schools allow individuality, there is a huge range of unusual masks – from the funny to the grotesque – for the bolder pupil. Coverings looking like duct tape, underwear, skulls, Hannibal Lecter or featuring snotty noses can all be found online, and will no doubt be a hit with school friends.