Thangam Debbonaire: There is no plan to avoid a self-made homelessness crisis
Shadow housing secretary warns that a perfect storm is brewing with renters facing eviction next month and the economic impact of Covid
Thangam Debbonaire has "lived and breathed housing" ever since the Bristol West MP was appointed shadow housing secretary by the Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, two weeks into lockdown. Her immediate focus is the measures needed to avoid the homelessness crisis looming. Debbonaire wants to see much more done to ensure that people keep a roof over their heads: not just the rough sleepers – many of whom received temporary respite from the streets thanks to emergency government funding – but people newly homeless and the plight of hundreds of thousands of tenants at risk of being evicted due to rent arrears accrued due to the pandemic.
Last week the government extended by a month its temporary ban on evictions in England and Wales that was introduced in March. The reprieve follows a chorus of warnings that to end it without other safeguards in place risked a surge in homelessness.
"Without a plan, we are just going to be in the same situation again in a month's time," says Debbonaire, unimpressed by the 11th hour U-turn.
"There is the possibility that there will be a quarter of a million people who are at risk of eviction over the next few months at exactly the time when we are going back into the autumn and a possible [second] spike in Covid," she says, quoting research from the housing charity Shelter. "My fear is that there'll be a large number of people for whom there is no plan, for whom the government has not prepared." An even bleaker picture is presented by the District Council Network, which represents 187 district councils in England. It found that almost half a million households (486,242), could be in danger of being made homeless when the eviction ban is lifted. Debbonaire thinks that government ministers may have a blindspot where tenants and their struggles in paying increasingly high rents are concerned. "I don't think they are really getting what's going on for people who are in work but whose wages have fallen or whose job insecurity has grown during the crisis," she says. And some of these will be the government's own supporters. "I would be surprised if there aren't people struggling with their rents in Tory-held seats just as much as in Labour-held seats," she points out.
The charity Streetlink reports that a new cohort of people have already been made homeless in England since the pandemic struck, despite government claims that its scheme to help rough sleepers into accommodation during lockdown got more than 90% of homeless people off the streets.
Debbonnaire warns that a perfect storm is brewing. To cap it all, the government's top homelessness adviser, Dame Louise Casey, suddenly resigned last week. Although Debbonnaire doesn't know the circumstances behind Casey's departure, she says: "It seems there is no plan to avoid a self-made crisis this winter."
Debbonaire set out her own proposal to protect renters from the fallout of the pandemic in a five-point plan in May that called for the eviction ban to stay in place while legislative changes are made. These changes would include the delivery of the government's promise to scrap "no-fault" eviction notices and outlaw evictions on the grounds of rent arrears if these were accrued through the hardship caused by the coronavirus crisis. Renters should then have at least two years to pay back these arrears.
"You could do that in line with the way that the Coronavirus Act was done, which is time limited," says Debbonaire.
To avoid rent arrears in the first place, she wants universal credit provision improved and a temporary increase to the local housing allowance – which determines how much benefit people receive to cover their rent – to ensure that tenants are able to pay . She cites the example of a £1,100 monthly rent for a two-bedroom flat in Bristol. "That's way over the £824.99 that is the local housing allowance for Bristol for a two-bed property".
She also wants the government to "honour what they originally promised" to councils back in March because, she says, while she welcomed the government's Everybody In initiative for rough sleepers, several months on, councils have been provided with "only a tiny fraction of the true cost".
"Local government was told to "do whatever it takes" and you will be reimbursed. Instead of which, we hear the same figures again and again: 'we've given local government x, and they should be able to manage'. I fear that what will happen is if the government doesn't take action, they're going to blame the consequences on local government. That, in my view, [would be] outrageous because if local government has to make any more changes to budgeting there are going to be really difficult decisions about which services they can and can't run. And I want the government to take responsibility for this."In addition to "stronger rent regulations", Labour's housing policy plans include "much more affordable and social housing". But anyone expecting to hear anytime soon about the party's vision for everyone to have a decent home that they can afford to live in will be sorely disappointed. She says she will be consulting with the party, colleagues and experts over the next couple of years at least on how to realistically achieve this goal.Other pressing issues in her in-tray include putting down amendments to the government's planning bill, which proposes to exempt developers of smaller sites from obligations to pay for local infrastructure.
Debbonaireis a former professional cellist whose musical career overlapped with another in the field of domestic violence. In her twenties, she changed her name by deed poll from Singh – her late father was Indian, her mother English – to Debbonaire. It is a name borrowed from a valued relative from her first marriage, she explains.
Her first year in parliament was marred by a breast cancer diagnosis within a month of being elected. And her first appointment as shadow arts and culture minister in early 2016 was mired in confusion after it was announced on her first day of radiotherapy and before any approach from the then Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn. A remain campaigner in the EU referendum, she quit her post over Corbyn's role in the campaign, but later returned as shadow whip, then as a shadow Brexit minister.With Boris Johnson's government blessed with a whopping Conservative majority, it must be tough to try to shape the policy debate, but Debbonaire is determined to sway ministerial minds.She smiles about her prospects on this front: "I am keeping my expectations managed but I'm putting every bit of effort I can into trying to persuade [the government] to change course."
Age: 54.Lives: Bristol and London.Family: Married, aunt to many nieces and nephews.Education: Bradford girls' grammar school; Chetham's School of Music; University of Oxford, maths BSc (left before graduating); St John's City College of Technology, Manchester; Bristol University, MSc management, development and social responsibility. Career: 2015 – present: MP for Bristol West; April 2020–present: shadow housing secretary; January–April 2020: shadow minister for exiting the European Union; October 2016–April 2020: shadow whip; Jan–June 2016: shadow arts and culture minister; 2008–15: research and fundraising manager, Respect (the UK organisation for domestic violence intervention programmes – DVIPs – working with perpetrators); 2008–10: sessional group work facilitator, DVIP; 2006–08: accreditation officer, Respect; 1997–2015: director, Domestic Violence Responses Training and Research; 1991–98: national children's officer, Women's Aid Federation England; 1977–2006: professional freelance cellist in chamber music and theatre.Public life: School governor, Glenfrome primary school, Bristol; trustee, University of Bristol Students' Union (UBU); local traffic action group; committee member and volunteer for various domestic violence support charities; co-founder, the Parliamentary String Quartet The Statutory Instruments.Interests: Arabic, running, knitting, theatre, baking bread, classical music (cellist).