End of eviction ban in England and Wales 'could cause Covid surge'
Doctors and health officials warn in letter of impact of homelessness 'avalanche'
Senior doctors and health officials have said an "avalanche" of homelessness could drive up Covid-19 infection rates if the government fails to extend the ban on housing evictions introduced under lockdown.
Signatories to a letter sent to the communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, include representatives of the British Medical Association, the Royal College of GPs, the Royal College of Physicians and the Faculty of Public Health.
"As public health organisations, we are deeply concerned that failure to prevent an evictions and homelessness crisis could significantly contribute to an increase of Covid-19 infections," the letter says.
The moratorium on evictions in England and Wales – introduced by ministers in March, and then extended in June until 23 August – has provided a breathing space for tenants who have run up rent arrears during the pandemic after their incomes fell as a result of furlough, shielding, or job loss, it says.
"Now that these measures are being withdrawn, we are deeply concerned that the government does not have an adequate plan to address the growing rent debt crisis and to prevent a catastrophic wave of evictions and homelessness as we head towards autumn and winter."
It adds: "People forced into overcrowded temporary or emergency accommodation by eviction are at greatly increased risk of being unable to isolate if needed, face greater challenges in following social distancing guidelines and may lack adequate access to basic hygiene measures shown to reduce infection rates."
An estimated 227,000 adult renters in England – around 3% of all private renters – have fallen into arrears since the start of the pandemic, putting them at risk of losing their homes when the evictions ban ends, according to research by the housing charity Shelter.
Housing has been a key determinant in the unequal impact of Covid-19 on BAME households, the letter says. The virus has thrived in areas where social deprivation is highest and housing affordability is lowest, such as London, and has had a disproportionate effect on migrant workers with no recourse to public funds.
It adds: "Should the government fail to adequately prevent an evictions and homelessness crisis, it will be black, Asian, and minority ethnic [BAME) people who will be most exposed to risk of homelessness and to the public health impacts."
Daniel J Carter, an epidemiologist and member of health campaigners Medact, said: "The gap in government's policy to protect renters increases the public health risk. If you cannot pay your rent, you may fear eviction. If you fear eviction, you may continue to travel and work. If you continue to travel and work, you may inadvertently acquire or spread Covid-19. And if enough people continue to spread the virus, a second wave of the pandemic looks inevitable."
Earlier this week a poverty inquiry found that poor housing, overcrowding and high rents in the London borough of Brent, one of the UK's most deprived areas, had helped turn it into a hotspot for Covid-19 deaths. Brent has the worst Covid death rate in England and Wales per 100,000 population, with 490 deaths to the end of July.
The doctors' letter, puts further pressure on the government, which has been heavily lobbied to extend the ban in recent weeks by campaigners, MPs, and the mayor of London.
However, the National Residential Landlords Association (NRLA) said an extension was unnecessary. It estimates that during the pandemic 95% of private tenants are either paying their rent or have agreed with their landlord to pay a lower rent or defer payment.
Chris Norris, policy director for the NRLA, said: "Extending the ban on repossessions is not necessary. Our research clearly shows that the vast majority of landlords and tenants are working together constructively to sustain tenancies wherever possible."