Youth work in lockdown: 'I flagged a new case of neglect every week'
We are trying to stop a tidal wave of vulnerable young people falling through the gaps in services
The pandemic has hit every aspect of society hard but it's young people who are most acutely affected. The chaos around exam results in England is just the latest example of how thousands of vulnerable youngsters face an uncertain future.
As youth workers, we have been supporting young people and their communities at a time when much of the other support they rely on, including schools, has simply fallen away.
I've been helping one young woman who would not leave her room and wasn't sleeping due to anxiety and depression triggered by the pandemic. She stopped speaking to us at one stage and we had to contact her family to help them engage with her and talk through her concerns.
Even before the pandemic, young people were being failed. A recent report from the children's commissioner for England suggests that in 2017/18, 123,000 teenagers aged 13-17 fell through gaps in provision.
But the problem could already be much bigger. Our experience over the past few months suggests many young people are teetering on the brink.
At Mahdlo Youth Zone in Oldham, my team of about 70 staff support more than 4,300 young people aged eight to 19, and up to 25 for those with a disability. We're part of a network of youth centres supporting 50,000 young people nationwide and sadly, our experiences in Oldham are not unique.
We are a lifeline for many young people, allowing them to talk to trusted and trained adults on their terms, take part in a range of activities, gain new skills and, crucially, create valuable social connections with their peers. Often, we're the only safe space and source of positive contact with the community they have.
It was devastating when lockdown forced us to effectively close our doors, even though we knew it was necessary. We also knew we had a responsibility to the young people who relied on us, and quickly adapted to deliver remote support via one-to-one and group video calls or telephone check-ins.
We prioritised young people at risk and those close to the at-risk category, often being in daily contact with the most vulnerable, trying our best to stop them falling through the gaps. This has been vital. Around half of our members are from households in the Oldham area in the bottom 5% of deprived backgrounds.
Covid-19 is amplifying the challenges young people already face in places like Oldham. Earlier this month the Joseph Rowntree Foundation released a report revealing that Oldham is in the top 25 vulnerable areas most susceptible to job losses and unemployment as a result of the pandemic.
During lockdown, we went far beyond what people might expect of youth work. We regularly supplied food parcels, sanitary and hygiene products to young people and their families. We've helped parents with budgeting, housing and health issues, often during team members' own time.
We've tried to tackle the challenges of digital exclusion by providing some young people with devices and an internet connection so they could do their schoolwork remotely and engage online with their friends.
While there's rightly been much attention on the huge challenges education and children's services are facing, it feels as though youth work, and the positive role it plays for young people, can be overlooked.
Youth workers are part-teacher, part-social worker, part-mental health professional and much more. To many young people, we are an extension of their family. For those really struggling at home, we can be their only respite.
I flagged a new case of neglect every week throughout lockdown as young people fell into the at-risk category, but at the same time, several vulnerable young people's cases were de-prioritised by social services due to limited capacity, something made much worse by Covid-19.
The current restrictions in Greater Manchester have increased our concerns, and with a potential stricter local lockdown looming in Oldham, I fear we could see many more vulnerable young people affected.
Youth services need increased recognition, support and funding. Many young people have spent months incredibly isolated and facing increasingly challenging situations at home, particularly as the economic shockwaves of the pandemic ripple out.
The positive effects of youth work on social mobility, mental and physical health, emotional resilience and sense of connection, identity and community help prepare them for many of the challenges they are likely to face over the coming years and decades.
Investing in youth services is an early intervention strategy that makes sound political, social and economic sense. If young people's needs aren't met now, there will be major future costs for health and welfare services.
The pandemic has seen young people give up so much. It is our duty to help them achieve the future they deserve.
Leo Casey is a youth work manager at Mahdlo Youth Zone in Oldham, part of national youth charity OnSide Youth Zones