'I was thinking dark thoughts': homeless during lockdown
Paddy, 38, slept rough for first time after being evicted from Coventry home amid pandemic
In late April, with the coronavirus pandemic barely past its peak, a private landlord in Coventry flouted a ban on evictions and gave Paddy, 38, until the weekend to pay the rent he owed. Having been made unemployed in January, and with the lockdown erasing any hope of a new job, the delivery driver's prospects were bleak. When the deadline expired he was evicted with nothing but a duvet, pillow, a few clothes and some crisps and chocolate grabbed from the kitchen cupboards and crammed into a pair of blue Ikea bags.
Paddy, who asked for the Guardian not to use his surname, had been in constant employment since he left school in 1998 but now faced homelessness for the first time.
"I went out the gate thinking: I don't know what I am going to do," he said. "I hadn't been in that situation before. It wasn't very nice."
This was an understatement. That night his attempt to sleep by the canal was disturbed by rats scurrying around him. "I couldn't sleep," he said. "You doze for 10 minutes and then you hear something."
Paddy was not the only one to find himself sleeping rough for the first time when lockdown hit. Despite claims by the government that more than 90% of homeless people were helped off the streets at the height of the pandemic, a Guardian investigation has found that reports of people sleeping rough rose sharply during that period.
While ministers launched a multimillion-pound scheme to rehouse people during the crisis, charities said the pandemic also led to a new cohort of people being made homeless as services and facilities closed and they lost their jobs.
The day after Paddy was forced to leave his home, he went to the council offices for help but found them closed because of Covid-19. He was also trying to keep away from other people for fear of contracting the virus, and moved the next night to a secluded private car park beside the cathedral, wrapping his duvet beneath him as a cushion against the concrete. It went on like that for eight nights as he failed to sleep, being nourished by an orange, an apple and some water donated each morning by a sympathetic clergyman.
"It was horrible," he said. "It was the worst thing that ever happened to me. I was at the point of thinking nobody is going to help me. It was a huge emotional stress. I was thinking dark thoughts."
Finally he was found by Coventry city council's rough sleepers team, who put him in touch with the Crisis charity, which over the last few months has helped him back on to his feet. Paddy is now in a room in a shared house and is studying for his heavy goods vehicle licence to get back into work. But, he said, he would never forget the torment of his sleepless week on the streets, or, for that matter, the rest he had when Crisis placed him in a hotel for his first night back indoors. He closed his eyes and slept for 15 hours unbroken.