Mark Adams: Care homes have been left to prepare for a Covid second wave alone
Care home chief says support for the sector is non-existent and describes the delay to weekly testing for care workers and residents as a 'joke'
Mark Adams has been among the most vocal critics of the government's handling of the Covid crisis in care homes where close on 20,000 people have died of the virus in England alone.
But the chief executive of the national social care charity, Community Integrated Care (CIC), insists that he's not usually so outspoken. He says he recalls a "huge eruption of frustration" when he heard the prime minister claiming last month that "too many care homes didn't really follow the procedure in the way that they could". Adams at the time called the comments "clumsy and cowardly".
Boris Johnson's refusal to apologise at prime minister's questions just rubbed salt into the wound. "At best, it was clumsy or ill-informed or, at worst, if not Kafkaesque, it was disingenuous, and ... an attempt to transfer blame. And I don't think we'll ever know quite what the intention was. Either way, it was the wrong thing to do," says Adams.
CIC employs 6,000 staff and has 3,500 supported living places and nursing home provision for 1,000 people with dementia – predominantly paid for by local authorities – across 450 sites in England and Scotland, one of which recently featured in a BBC Panorama investigation about care homes and the pandemic. Quick to draw up a strategy as the pandemic unfolded, CIC closed its doors to visitors and new residents in early March. Despite this pre-emptive measure, 49 residents had died from Covid-19 (11 in supported living) by early May.
Adams says he was "battle-weary" at everything the charity was dealing with when he called out Johnson – particularly the emotional toll it was taking on frontline care worker colleagues, residents and grieving relatives.
Not surprisingly, he wasn't alone among social care chief executives and care home workers. "Every single person that I speak to has just said that this is 100% their experience," he says.
The challenges faced by the sector over recent months have been well documented from a lack of personal protective equipment (PPE), to an initial absence of proactive testing – followed by an ongoing struggle to establish regular testing – and a plethora of guidance, some of which has flatly contradicted previous missives. It was left to care home providers to count the rising death toll and to deal with the huge fallout on residents and staff. At CIC, the death toll could have been far worse, says Adams, had the charity not pre-empted guidance and closed its doors to visitors and new residents in early March.
What has irked Adams are the ministerial claims made, such as the "protective ring" that the health and social care secretary, Matt Hancock, insisted on 15 May had been thrown around care homes right from the start of the outbreak. Adams says it bears little relation to the reality on the ground.
In contrast, social care has been an afterthought, he says. "The problem is that you've had the kind of inference politically that there's been an awful lot of support for the care operators through the crisis. And really, how that translates to support in the field and on the frontline – it's almost been non-existent."
A recent cross-party Commons public accounts committee agreed, when it concluded that care homes in England were "thrown to the wolves".
Measures by the devolved administration to support care homes in Scotland have not been great either, according to Adams: testing in care homes was rolled out many weeks later than in England; just as in England, there has been nothing for supported living residents, despite this cohort being "every bit as vulnerable, often with comorbidity" as elderly people living in care homes, says Adams; and there have been difficulties in accessing funds. That said, care staff have received a 3.3% pay rise in Scotland and testing is now "better than England," he says.
For Adams, there is no time to waste ahead of an anticipated second wave. This includes finding and funding sufficient PPE and looking abroad at effective protective measures, such as walkthrough booths that spray disinfectant as people go in and out of care homes.
"Obviously, none of us knows quite how bad the second wave is going to be. We're trying to prepare for the worst and just keep everything crossed that it doesn't happen, but we're doing it alone, again. There's no system approach to this. It still feels a little bit like it did in February or March: we're facing an unknown threat and we're having to prepare for it alone for a second time."
Regular testing for care home staff and residents in England has now been pushed back to September, which Adams calls "a joke".
He says: "If we ended up with another major outbreak now, that would occur before we're even getting back to the weekly testing. So we're almost as bad as we would have been in March and April."
If anything positive comes out of this in the future, it has to be the reform of the social care system, says Adams, who led a number of healthcare organisations before taking the helm at CIC three years ago.
His vision is of a politically accountable national care service that sets the rules from the centre for providers. This would include a points-based system of eligibility that would end the "postcode lottery of interpretation", the introduction of training requirements, and minimum salary benchmarks that would improve the chronically low pay of frontline workers. Underpinning this would be a political conversation about increased investment and how it is paid for. Adams would like to see an amalgamation of the thousands of small care home providers into about 100 large organisations: these would not only be able to provide economies of scale, but also invest in infrastructure and technology to enhance service quality.
CIC had been planning a series of mergers with smaller charities, and ensuring the charity's first surplus in four years. Now, it faces an uncertain future as it contends with the pandemic and the financial fallout. It has sourced about 93% of the 450,000 items of PPE it needs for its frontline staff every week – less than half of which has been reimbursed by the government to date.
Although it has managed to claim just under £2m from the government's emergency fund  distributed to local authorities in England, the remaining gap for the charity between the costs incurred to combat Covid-19 and government funding is £2.5m and counting. This includes a dramatic decline in the nursing home occupancy rate, from about 93% to 70%. Thanks to its capital assets, Adams estimates that the charity can continue with this level of Covid-related costs, but only for another 12 to 18 months. After that, he warns "we, like other organisations, would eventually fail".
When a commission finally looks into how Covid was handled by the government and its agencies, Adams believes there will be a day of reckoning.
"There will have to be some holding up of hands, and people saying that they were slow out of the block and [that] ultimately things could have been done differently," he says. "I'm sure that will come out in the wash, eventually."
Age: 57.
Lives: North Wales.
Family: Married, six children.
Education: Ellesmere college, Shropshire; Manchester Business School, Chartered Insurance qualification (ACII).
Career: 2017–present: chief executive, Community Integrated Care; 2016-2018: chairman, Dubai-based Lumina Advisers; 2017–20: chairman, Dubai-based The Health Care Network; 2012-17: founder/chief executive, Anglo Arabian Healthcare; 2009-12: chief executive, Gulf Healthcare International; 2008 – 09: chief executive, Enaya Healthcare; 2007-08: chief executive, Virgin Care; 2004–07: chief executive, Netcare UK; 2005-06: director, BMI Healthcare; 2002-05: adviser/non-executive board member, PruHealth; 2002-05: chief executive, Corporate Services Group; 1998-2002: chief executive, (AXA) PPP Healthcare; 1994-98: managing director, Denplan; 1989-94: founder/managing director, Longden &amp; Cook Consultancy.
Public life: non-executive director, National Care Forum, non-executive director, Countess of Chester hospital.
Interests: Golf, skiing and Everton FC.