In times like these, it can help to ask 'What's good?'
As we stare own the barrel of global disaster, let's accentuate the positive
A green light on my laptop shows my best friend has logged on.
"What's good?" I type, starting a fresh chapter in our 11-year-long digital conversation. It's an exploratory move – I'm trying something out. She latches on to it instantly.
"'What's good?' That is a very high-pressure question for this time of day," she types back. That is inarguable: it's a tough question for this year altogether.
But "What's good?" has been trotting around my head for a while. I picked the phrase up a few years ago working as a translator for a brilliant Belgian-Congolese musician and filmmaker, one of the most rewarding, challenging (and badly paid) jobs I've ever had. He put it in a song and I highlighted and queried it, confused. That was very much my role in our professional relationship, asking clueless, cringey questions in the manner of your granny discovering grime. "Is this intended as a greeting? I'm not sure it works. Maybe ''sup?'"
I was wrong, of course. Without going too deep into Urban Dictionary, which I did at the time (looking for English equivalents for Belgo-Congolese slang that fit his rhyme schemes), it's basically, "What's up?"
I'm trying to make "What's good?" happen because we need new greetings, like the "unprecedented times" email openers we started trialling in March. "How are you?" is too loaded. There have been several incidents recently where, asked how I am, I have failed to give the breezy lie that is the only correct answer (fine, obviously). We know the "how are you?/fine" exchange, although made up of words, is not a real question and answer. It's a reassuring convention; no less of a dance than the mating ritual of the peacock spider.
It's why the first thing you learn in a foreign language is the steps to execute the local greeting routine.
What no one wants to get in response to, "How are you?" is a haggard middle-aged woman staring at them with the haunted expression of an unclaimed refuge dog and saying something unnerving like, "It's pretty rough right now," as I have done to unsuspecting acquaintances. That's a grave breach of the social contract.
Should we all just use this moment of global vulnerability to tell the truth in our daily interactions, ushering in a glorious new age of emotional honesty? No, please, no. There is, actually, plenty of emotional honesty happening – many of my conversations are a swift, brutal rundown of what's bad. That needs the right context, however – not acquaintances, and not, necessarily, I think, your nearest and dearest either, at least not all the time. If my husband (Mr Worst Case Scenario) and I (Ms We Are Doomed) talked too often about what's bad, we'd be walled into a bunker with tins of beans and a crossbow, or divorced, within weeks.
Instead, I write what's bad to my friends while I'm waiting for the washing machine to finish or in the bathroom, toothbrush clenched between teeth to type, in tiny pockets of solo time. They write back in their own quiet moments. We even get to tell each other what's bad in person occasionally now – a rare treat. These drinks, walks and text exchanges are an instant bare-bones unburdening of everything we most need to say – the valve opens and it all rushes out: "I'm so depressed I can hardly move"; "Still full of despair"; "Massive panic"; "I hate everyone" (OK, yes, that one is mine).
I love my what's bad conversations. We laugh plenty during them, gallows humour as we stare down the barrel of contracting opportunities, global cataclysm and bottomless childcare, reaching out to each other to string a few choice obscenities together. But there is a time and an audience for this kind of realness and it's not in the checkout queue to someone you recognise from spin class, or your child's geography teacher.
The thing about "What's good?" is that it does not deny the truth: that 95% of everything is currently terrible. It tacitly acknowledges that, but offers a way of focussing on what illuminates the gloom.
If you were to ask me today, I'd say: "I stroked some hens," and, "I saw my sister for the first time since Christmas – the sight of her wheeling her bike made my eyes prickly with happiness – and we sat in the yard and ranted about the Tories." I might mention my rapturous immersion in Clare Chambers's beautiful novel Small Pleasures, itself a sort of meditation on finding moments of joy (a solo cigarette, a melting ice-cream) in a context of wider sadness.
I'd tell you that I went to London and walked through Bloomsbury in the early Sunday sunshine, everything so silent my footsteps echoed. That I saw my best friend and we lay on the grass like beached seals, laughing and eating ice-cream. I converted her, incidentally. We have just exchanged this morning's tally: a croissant; a silent house; plump, warm blackberries along the cycle path. Go on, try it: what's good?
Follow Emma on Twitter @BelgianWaffling