Autumn term chaos feared over exam resits and appeals
Teachers warn that new pupils may be neglected as schools and colleges take action in wake of the A-level algorithm debacle
Like so many headteachers, Caroline Vile was furious when she discovered her school's A-level results. Two-fifths of the teacher-assessed grades at Vile's school in Ellesmere Port, Cheshire – one of the most deprived areas in the country – had been downgraded.
"We've got amazing students, some of whom do incredibly well, some of whom have had childhood experiences and traumas which mean they don't do as well, but they all work hard and the school is on an improvement journey," she said, adding that the results were, quite simply, "not fair".
The algorithm used by the exams watchdog, Ofqual, to standardise exam results meant the historic poor performance of former pupils at her school was used last week to dramatically downgrade some of the assessments awarded to A-level pupils by their teachers. For example, one of the school's top-performing students, who achieved A* A* A in her mocks, was downgraded to three Bs. "Due to the statistical model that's being used, our students feel they are being discriminated against," Vile said.
Like many headteachers up and down the country, she is planning to instigate a considerable number of appeals on behalf of her students.
The government has been back-tracking at high speed. First, Gavin Williamson, the education secretary, announced the "triple lock", allowing students to take their Ofqual grade, appeal to receive their mock exam grade, or resit exams: A-levels in October or GCSEs in November.
Under pressure from Labour and Tory MPs, the government then reversed its plan to charge schools for appeals.
And on Saturday came a further retreat when Ofqual announced that appeals would also consider coursework. These "non-exam assessments" could include recordings of performances by drama students, artwork by arts students and practical projects by technology students.
The announcement was followed hours later by an extraordinary admission from the regulator that it was withdrawing that policy, without explanation, adding further confusion to the exams fiasco.
Ofqual said in a statement: "Earlier today we published information about mock exam results in appeals. This policy is being reviewed by the Ofqual Board and further information will be published in due course."
Yet the extra work involved in fixing this year's exams fiasco could throw the autumn term into chaos, distracting teachers and placing additional pressures on school leaders. There are fears that, instead of being able to focus entirely on their new cohort of students, headteachers will need to spend lots of time dealing with the fallout and heartbreak caused by the "unfair" grades Ofqual has awarded.
Sarah Hannafin, spokeswoman for the National Association of Headteachers (NAHT), said: "School leaders and teachers want to make sure students get the grades they deserve. That's their key focus and they'll do whatever they can to support students in that. But that pulls time away from their efforts to make sure their school is ready, that staff are ready and that everything's in place to open in September. They will find a way to do it. But it will place additional pressure on staff and schools."
Around 40% of A-level grades have been downgraded from their teacher-assessed grades as a result of Ofqual's statistical model in England, and a similar proportion (35% to 40%) of GCSEs are expected to be downgraded later this week. If all of these grades are appealed against – and grades cannot go down on appeal, so there is no risk involved in the process for students – more than two million GCSEs and A-levels would need to be reassessed. And unlike in Scotland, where individuals can appeal against their own grades, Ofqual is forcing schools in England to instigate and manage the appeals process for all students.
The NAHT is already advising all its members to challenge A-level and GCSE results that have been adjusted by two or more grades.
"We're questioning how a change that significant can be fair," said Hannafin. "Teachers have spent a lot of time calculating the centre-assessed grade with evidence, and they have got the professional expertise to do that. We can't have students getting grades just because they fit the past profile of schools' results. That is unfairness. We have to rectify that."
Sammy Wright, lead commissioner for the Social Mobility Commission and a deputy headteacher, said that 45% of grades at his school had been downgraded and half of his students had at least one mock grade that would give them grounds for appeal. "Our centre-assessed grades stuck very closely to our mocks. So there's potential for us to put in appeals for most of our cohort of 200 Year 11 kids."
Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said the government was abdicating responsibility for the mess it has created by relying on the appeals process to correct the flaws in Ofqual's algorithm. "It's hard to see why you wouldn't as a young person request the appeals process, and I think we could see that on an industrial scale. There's a genuine sense that schools will be inundated with requests for appeals."
He is worried this will prove "a significant distraction" from the most important thing teachers should be focusing on: the pupils they teach: "It's just going to add to the already high anxiety levels of young people, teachers and leaders."
Organising a wide range of A-level and GCSE exams next term will also create a logistical nightmare for schools, which may struggle to offer any revision support – or even an exam hall – to their former pupils. In a recent survey of NAHT members, 75% of respondents stated that a lack of available rooms or space for exams and in-person teaching to occur concurrently would be a significant challenge, if an autumn exam series was run in their school or college.
"The priority is making sure that current students all go back to school in September," said Hannafin. "Schools need to utilise every space they've got to try to keep year-group bubbles and mixing to a minimum. The idea that they could take their hall out of action and keep meeting the needs of current students is just unreasonable."
Three-quarters of headteachers also said that it would be a challenge to effectively support the academic and wellbeing needs of their current cohorts of students alongside extra autumn exams.
"The logistics of dealing with social distancing and bubbles is going to be so significant that the thought of also trying to run a complete exam season in the winter months, when the Covid virus is most likely to resurface, feels very, very misguided," said Barton. He points out that a cough in the week of the exams could force a young person to isolate and miss their chance to improve their grade, disrupting even their life further. "It just raises questions about an education system which is so utterly reliant on an examination process and isn't prepared to trust its teachers – and isn't resilient."
A Department for Education spokesperson said: "We know there will be some students who will want the opportunity to sit an exam later this year and we have set out an extensive support package to help all schools, colleges and further education providers with the essential additional costs to run a full exam series in the autumn.
"This will help schools with the costs associated with running these exams including booking venues, sourcing invigilators, and meeting the cost of autumn exam fees if they exceed summer fee rebates."
A-level student Georgia Kettas, 18, has spent days over the past week crying. "My life has been decided by an algorithm that doesn't have any correlation to anything I've done. I feel like it's just randomly picked my name and gone: just chuck her down two grades."
When she opened her results envelope on Thursday, she was hoping to see the grades her teacher had submitted to the exams watchdog Ofqual. But instead of the B in economics her teacher felt she deserved, she had been awarded a D. "There's nothing to justify why I've gone from a B to a D," she says.
As a result she lost her place to study economics at Loughborough University. "I was really excited about going. I dreamed of going there for ages."
She struggles to understand why she got a D. "I was asked by my teacher to help other people. If I was a D student, I wouldn't have been asked to do that."
In a mock exam in February Kettas got an A. "I was three marks off full marks." But she isn't sure the grade will count towards an appeal as she sat the exam in the library, not an official examination hall. "The school and I don't know what's going on."
She now has little faith in the system, she says. "I feel let down, upset and angry."