Domestic abuse prosecutions fell by 24% at end of 2019
Rape convictions fell by 19% in same period with fears of backlog of cases awaiting trial
The number of domestic abuse prosecutions fell by almost a quarter in the last three months of 2019, compared to the previous year, according to quarterly figures released by the Crown Prosecution Service. Rape prosecutions also fell 23% in the last three months of 2019 compared to a year prior, maintaining a historic low.
The fall in domestic violence prosecutions and convictions comes as police and refuges have seen a significant rise in cases during the coronavirus lockdown.
The Metropolitan police force, which covers London, said charges and cautions for domestic violence were up 24% from 9 March, when people with coronavirus symptoms were asked to self-isolate, compared with last year. Domestic violence refuges have said they are running out of space, with many full or effectively closed amid an "epidemic inside this pandemic".
According to the quarterly CPS figures, rape convictions fell 19% in the same period when compared to the previous year. The number of completed prosecutions dropped from 684 to 524 in rape cases, while convictions dropped from 445 to 362. The charging rate – which has been a key concern of groups in the violence against women and girls sector – has improved slightly. The proportion of suspects charged increased to 54.7% in the third quarter of 19/20, compared with 48.2% in 18/19.
Sarah Green, director of End Violence Against Women Coalition, said: "We're disappointed at stagnant charging figures, and note the number of cases coming in the front door from police are still far too low, with delays overall increasing.
"So while the numbers across the last 12 months may show some minimal shifts, it is clear there is still a long way to go. The most recent crime outcomes data published last week show the overall charging rate for rape as 1.5%.
"Importantly these statistics represent the time before Covid-19, with the huge impacts it will have on the charging volumes, and the massive backlog of cases already awaiting trial."
Falling prosecution and conviction rates for rape, which are at a 10-year low, prompted the government to announce an end-to-end review of the criminal justice system's treatment of the crime. The number of rape charges have dropped by 51% since 2014, while reported rapes have more than doubled in the same period, from 20,751 to 58,657 in 2018-19. The review was originally due to publish this spring.
A CPS spokesperson said: "We want victims of sexual violence to come forward with confidence that whenever the legal test is met we will bring charges, no matter how challenging the case.
"While it is difficult to draw definitive conclusions at this stage, we welcome the promising beginning of a reversal of the recent trend as these figures show an increase in rape charging rates over the past year, and there are preliminary signs that the fall in the number of cases being referred to the CPS by the police is slowing down.
"Prosecuting rape continues to be a CPS priority, and we remain committed to the ongoing cross-government review."