Scottish care homes defend coronavirus response as deaths rise
Covid-19 deaths at facilities in Scotland have exceeded hospital fatalities for first time
We would like to hear from key workers in the UK. You can get in touch by filling in the form \nbelow, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor\n adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your \ncontributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss \nfurther.
Covid-19 deaths at facilities in Scotland have exceeded hospital fatalities for first time
Care homes have defended their response to coronavirus after deaths from the pandemic in Scottish facilities surpassed hospital fatalities for the first time.
In a further escalation of the crisis, data from National Records of Scotland (NRS) showed 52% of Covid-19 deaths last week occurred in care homes, totalling 338 fatalities, compared with 276 deaths in hospitals, or 42% of the total.
Deaths in care homes have continued to rise while they have fallen in hospitals and the general community for the last two weeks, the weekly data shows, exposing tensions between the Scottish government and the care home sector.
Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, said care homes had been given strict guidelines on managing the virus on 13 March, the day Scotland's first Covid-19 death was confirmed and 10 days before the UK-wide lockdown was imposed.
At her daily coronavirus briefing, Sturgeon said: "It is incumbent on care home providers, whether they are in the public or private sector, to follow and to implement the guidance."
She said the Care Inspectorate, the sector's regulator, would be examining every care home's conduct during the pandemic.
Donald Macaskill, the chief executive of the umbrella body Scottish Care, said the sector had already voluntarily adopted lockdown policies on 11 March, banning visits by families. "That started before anybody in the UK or Scottish governments arrived at that position," he said.
Operators had seen similar crises emerge in other European countries, he said, but the pandemic required grades of personal protective equipment never normally needed or used by care homes.
Prices for medical-grade PPE had gone up by 1,000% since the crisis began, he said, while the sector was expected to deliver 24-hour care for its residents at a cost of £4.41 an hour. "We have long argued that you can't provide care on the cheap," he said.
NRS figures showed a total of 2,272 people had died from Covid-19 in Scotland by Sunday 26 April. Of those, 52% occurred in hospitals, 39% in care homes and 9% in private homes and elsewhere since 13 March.
Macaskill said Scottish Care had gone further than Sturgeon by calling for hospital-grade face masks to be mandatory in all care homes, for staff and residents. Sturgeon on Tuesday recommended the public should use scarves and cloth as face coverings in busy shops or on public transport.
"I'm prepared to accept we will in retrospect learn lessons on how things would be done differently [in future] but we have certainly followed all the guidance issued by Public Health England and Health Protection Scotland," he said.
"I have absolutely no doubt that every woman and man who delivers care has one thing on their mind: to keep the virus out. The care home sector hasn't been complacent."
-key-workers
With many care homes reporting multiple deaths, the families of residents, the charity Age Scotland and care home managers have alleged that GPs have refused to visit care homes, or pressured families to sign "do not resuscitate" orders, while sick residents have not been admitted to hospital. NHS boards have also been accused of failing to allow care home staff to be tested for the virus.
Those allegations forced ministers to intensify their demands that care homes are treated as a priority by the NHS, but Sturgeon also denied her government had let care homes down.
"There has been no complacency at any stage of dealing with this crisis. Does that mean we haven't made mistakes along the way, I'm not here talking about care homes in particular, I'm talking in general – of course we will make mistakes," she said. "At every step we have sought to do what is right, what is best, what is necessary."