UK nurse, 66, dies from coronavirus days before retirement
Janice Glassey, 66, from Cheshire, was days from retirement when she died
A "completely healthy" nurse who was days away from retiring died shortly after contracting the coronavirus.
Janice Glassey, 66, worked in Halton, Cheshire for 14 years, looking after people receiving end-of-life care.
The mother-of-three, who was engaged to be married, died on 24 April after testing positive for Covid-19. She is one of the 127  health care workers reported to have died from the coronavirus, though that figure is thought to be an underestimate.
Her daughter, Kerri Glassey, 44, wrote on Facebook that her mother had no underlying health issues other than a problem with her knee and was "due to complete her last shift within the first week of her becoming unwell".
Glassey told the Liverpool Echo: "Mum was loved by everyone. She was so funny and had so much to look forward to.
"Mum was very dedicated to her job, she would regularly cover people's shifts. We are devastated as we were looking forward to sharing so many occasions together."
Her daughter had travelled from London to be with her mother during her final moments. "We are heartbroken, mum was completely healthy," she said.
Her mother was first treated at Whiston hospital, where she spent about a week on a ventilator in intensive care. She was then transferred to Liverpool heart and chest hospital, but died a couple of weeks later.
The Bridgewater Community Healthcare NHS foundation trust said in a statement: "We are deeply saddened to report the death of our colleague Janice Glassey who was a much loved and valued member of the Halton out-of-hours district nursing team.
"Janice was a healthcare assistant and gave 14 years of dedicated service to the people of Halton and tragically passed away on 24 April. Janice had tested positive for Covid-19.
"Our thoughts and condolences at this most difficult time are with Janice's family, friends and those who have worked with her for many years."
Tributes have poured in for Glassey on social media following news of her death. Jill Owen posted: "Words cannot express my sorrow for the loss of our Janice. I keep expecting her to walk through the door of oak meadow with her cheery face and enthusiasm for a job she loved."
Sarah Davies called her a "beautiful, caring woman … A good friend &amp; colleague who will be forever missed".