'We did what we set out to achieve': the staff who moved into care homes
At Sheffield's Bridgedale House there have been no Covid-19 cases, but it means some workers have not seen their families for weeks
Care assistants who moved in to a home to shield its vulnerable residents have managed to prevent any deaths or infections from Covid-19.
Five weeks ago Kirsty Scott left behind her two young children and moved into Bridgedale House care home in Sheffield, but she's missing her family more than ever.
"I've really missed them … so much," said Scott, a senior care assistant and mother of eight-year-old Amy and five-year-old Kieran. "I FaceTime them every day, sometimes two or three times a day."
But with all residents and staff at the specialist dementia facility still Covid-19 free and no deaths reported, she said the sacrifice was worth it. "We did what we set out to achieve and I'm very proud of that."
Thousands of residents have died in care homes in recent weeks and testing for residents is still not in place, a leaked Public Health England email revealed. Prof Martin Green, the chief executive of industry group Care England, said the number of fatalities in care "could easily exceed what's [happening] in hospitals".
Scott, 37, moved into the care home with a team of eight others at the start of the nationwide lockdown, to reduce the risk of anyone bringing the virus into the building by coming and going each day.
Most of that original team have since left and been replaced with a new cohort, who all self-isolated at home for two weeks before coming in to ensure they were not carrying the virus.
However, when Scott was asked to stay on for an extra two weeks, until the lockdown potentially ends at the start of May, she said yes. "Obviously after I spoke to the husband," she laughed. "But we both agreed it was probably safer I was here. The numbers are still too high and it was too much of a risk to take."
Not only does Scott have to think about the wellbeing of her 23 residents, all aged 65 and over, but at home her husband has diabetes and her daughter is asthmatic so both are vulnerable to Covid-19.
After a tough few weeks, she said she was very proud of how Kieran and Amy have handled the separation, and is only hoping they will hold off on their 4 May Star Wars Day celebrations ["May the fourth be with you"] until she's home. "I'm just looking forward to cuddles. And being sat on by both my kids – I can't wait," she said.
The Bridgedale House staff are not the only care workers to have moved into their workplaces to protect residents.
On the Isle of Wight, nine staff members at Victoria House care home are living in tents in the grounds of the home, after implementing a "no one in and no one out" policy. "To live in these facilities that we share with our residents, it's incredibly challenging and difficult," manager Claire Leggett told the BBC.
At Bridgedale House, the staff are sleeping in spare rooms and a training room, and brought home comforts such as their duvets and favourite snacks to help create a home from home. But it is the support from the public that has helped them the most.
"I got five birthday cards just from strangers telling us how much of a good job we're doing," said care assistant Sarah Willis, who has recently moved back into the home for a second stint. "The response from both the public and residents' families has just been fantastic. We couldn't be more thankful."
While Scott said the weeks have flown by with long shifts and constant vigilance for the virus, the experience has brought the team together. "People think it was a massive sacrifice, and in some ways it was," she said. "But in other ways, it was just what needed to be done to protect them."