Essex GP, 78, among latest NHS workers to die from coronavirus
Kamlesh Kumar Masson described as 'honest, kind and generous man'
We would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died from Covid-19. You can get in touch by filling in the form below, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your contributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss further.
Kamlesh Kumar Masson described as 'honest, kind and generous man'
A GP who made a "significant" contribution to the NHS over three decades is among the latest healthcare workers to die from Covid-19.
Kamlesh Kumar Masson, 78, was a locum GP who founded Milton Road surgery in Grays, Essex, in 1985 and worked there until 2017, after which he did locum work across Thurrock and Basildon.His family, who described him as someone who "would have wanted to practise medicine for many more years to come", said he last worked on 12 March, adding that his career "came to an unexpected end last month, when he unfortunately contracted Covid-19".
Masson is the seventh GP in the UK, and the fourth from Essex, to die from coronavirus. His family said he was "an honest, kind and generous man who was deeply respected by anyone who was privileged to cross paths with him. He was jovial, funny and kind, always wanting to make the best of any situation."He was well known locally and recognised as a "dedicated, determined, positive individual who would always do his utmost to help in all endeavours", they said.Masson completed his medical training in India and also worked as a doctor in east Africa. He worked in different parts of the UK before settling in Essex in 1975.
Dr Anil Kallil, a fellow GP and the chairman of NHS Thurrock clinical commissioning group (CCG), said: "We were very sad to hear of the passing of Dr Masson. He was a well-respected and liked GP in Thurrock, with a significant contribution over the last 30 years in the borough caring for patients and providing support.
"Later he provided GP services in both Thurrock and Basildon. We extend our heartfelt thanks to Dr Masson for his commitment and passion and our condolences to his family for their loss."
Another NHS worker, Laura Tanner, 51, who worked as a locality administrator in Essex, died in the arms of her husband, Kevin, as she waited for paramedics.
Kevin Tanner said his wife was "a lovely person, kind and she loved nature. She had a wicked sense of humour and was a very, very good mother to her children and a fantastic wife. She is going to be sorely missed by everyone."
He said: "She was a locality administrator for NHS Basildon &amp; Brentwood CCG – she was the administration side of the NHS. She put together care home packages in local area and stuff like that."
He said his wife started feeling unwell around 17 March, on his birthday. The couple both developed symptoms but his wife's got worse and they called a paramedic, who helped lower her temperature.About six days later, her condition worsened and she developed a severe shortness of breath. "She never went into hospital – she died in my arms at home … It was horrific for me … watching my wife come down that morning panicking and so out of breath. I was making calls, not sure what to do … She just passed [away] and slipped like that," he said.
"At times [throughout her illness] I thought she was getting better. I was looking after her and making sure she was getting food and paracetamol. Sometimes she would feel better and then get upstairs and then she would be worse."
Tanner attempted CPR with the help of paramedics on the phone, who then took over and treated her on arrival. He added that he was surprised that after his wife's death none of the family were tested. "We were just told to isolate for 14 days and let them know if we had symptoms. We did not know what to do and had to make phone calls asking: where do we stand?"
Larni Zuniga, 53, a nurse at CHD Living's Surrey Hills care home, has also died. The medic, originally from the Philippines, was granted British citizenship in February. He contracted the infection two weeks ago.
Zuniga, 54, was treated in intensive care at St Thomas' hospital in London at the same time as the prime minister. His friend Arnold Barrientos said: "Larni had absolutely sacrificed a lot for his family. He worked hard and he battled hard times of not seeing his family just to ensure a comfortable life for them."
Mahadaye Jagroop, described as a respected and loved nurse, died at Birmingham's Heartlands hospital, where she worked, on 22 April.
Lisa Stalley-Green, the chief nurse at University hospitals Birmingham NHS foundation trust, said: "It was with great sadness that we learned of the death of one of our highly valued colleagues, Mahadaye Jagroop.
-tributes-and-memories
"Mary was a respected and loved member of our team and touched the lives of many in her distinguished career as a nurse. This was demonstrated by the beautiful and heartfelt tribute by colleagues at Heartlands hospital this morning.
"Our thoughts and deepest condolences are with Mary's family, friends and colleagues at this sad time."