Care homes now UK's coronavirus frontline, sector leaders say
Operators say PM's claim the virus has been 'wrestled to the floor' is premature
The UK's coronavirus frontline has switched from hospitals to care homes, according to sector leaders who have dismissed Boris Johnson's claim that the virus has been "wrestled to the floor" as premature.
Deaths in some of the largest care home networks have surged by more than 70% in the last week or two, operators said on Monday. Official figures due on Tuesday are expected to show a significant increase.
In the week ending 19 April, 651 of the 682 coronavirus outbreaks reported across the whole of England were in care homes, Public Health England (PHE) reported.
Leaders in the sector have demanded greater medical help and said the peak of social care fatalities is yet to come.
Care UK reported 244 Covid-19 deaths in its facilities, a 74% rise in six days, including 18 deaths in a single home in north London where a care worker also died.
Four Seasons Health Care reported a 79% increase in deaths in two weeks, bringing its death toll to 286, while the UK's largest private provider, HC One, announced a 50% increase in deaths in 10 days, to 616. Bupa, which operates 125 homes, revealed it had lost well over 200 residents with confirmed or suspected coronavirus.
The figures contrasted with the prime minister's Downing Street speech on his first day back at work in which he declared: "We are now beginning to turn the tide." Johnson highlighted "fewer hospital admissions, fewer Covid patients in ICU, and real signs now that we are passing through the peak".
He added: "If this virus were a physical assailant – an unexpected and invisible mugger, which I can tell you from personal experience it is – then this is the moment when we have begun together to wrestle it to the floor."
Vic Rayner, the director of the National Care Forum, which represents charitable care home operators, said: "We are nowhere near a peak in care homes and this is absolutely the wrong time to turn away from actions to fight the virus.
"This isn't a one-round fight. We need to make sure the care sector gets the resources it needs, and we haven't yet seen the level of action we need to get this right. The frontline of this virus has moved into care homes and the clinical focus now needs to shift."
Jeremy Richardson, the chief executive of Four Seasons, said: "We're on the plateau rather than wrestling anything to the floor."
The number of deaths across all care homes has been hard to pin down. Last week the Department of Health and Social Care said the official death toll in care homes in England had doubled in five days, to more than 2,000 by 15 April. Figures for that period will be confirmed by the Office of National Statistics on Tuesday alongside the release of Care Quality Commission data.
The current official estimates, which are equivalent to 10% of the deaths in NHS hospitals, appear to be out of line with the figures given by operators. The operators of 1,128 homes – 5% of the UK's total – have reported more than 1,800 deaths to the Guardian.
Julie Ogley, the president of the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services, said she believes that as many people could die from the virus in social care as in hospitals, where the death toll passed 21,000 on Monday.
She said supplies of personal protective equipment (PPE) remained inadequate, with a promised national ordering system still not operating and not expected for several weeks.
"I am very anxious that as we begin to talk about parts of the hospitals going back to [normal operation], we still need to protect social care," she said. "We must not be distracted. There needs to be a concerted effort to make sure those living in care homes are secure. If we don't get that sorted out, we will end up with another wave of the virus and that will be much more difficult to deal with."
Andrew Knight, chief executive of Care UK's residential care services, said: "Last week was the most difficult week we have faced to date. Over the last few weeks our homes have been caring for a significant number of residents who were symptomatic, and very sadly many have not made it through the illness."
Three-quarters of the chain's 122 care homes are dealing with infections. Sonya Kaygan, a carer at Elizabeth Lodge in Enfield, died along with 18 of the residents she helped to look after. Six other homes in London have recorded more than 10 deaths each, and 15 residents died at Stanley Park, a care home in County Durham.
Knight said testing "on a meaningful scale" was essential to curbing rising fatalities elsewhere. "This has been very limited to date and we need to see this scaled up significantly," he said. "This is not just about those who are symptomatic getting back to work quickly and safely, it is also about proactive testing for those who are caring for residents to provide them with additional reassurance and ensure we aren't inadvertently bringing the virus into the home."
A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: "Social care staff are on the frontline of our fight against coronavirus and we are making sure the social care system, and other public services, have all the resources they need during the Covid-19 outbreak.
"We have given an extra £1.6bn to local authorities to address the additional pressures, rolled out testing for all social care staff, and are working day and night to deliver PPE – including setting up a dedicated phone line for care homes to report any shortages."