'Invisible mugger': how Boris Johnson's language hints at his thinking
PM's first podium speech since leaving intensive care provides an insight into his approach to coronavirus
In his first podium speech since he left intensive care earlier this month, Boris Johnson described coronavirus as a "physical assailant".
It was "an unexpected and invisible mugger", he told the nation, giving a colourful twist to the martial metaphors he and his cabinet have tended to use when talking about the disease (in March, he described the crisis as a "fight … in which every one of us is directly enlisted").
Perhaps it's appropriate that the prime minister chose to personify Covid-19 more directly than in the past. He has, after all, emerged from his own very intimate bout with the virus. And it's not surprising that the pandemic has proved fertile ground for linguistic invention either: things aren't readily accessible to the five senses – whether abstract concepts like Brexit, or invisible pathogens – tend to get "translated", via metaphor, into easily graspable images.
That process, though, is not a neutral one. As linguists such as George Lakoff have pointed out, the metaphors we choose both reflect our prejudices and influence our approach to the world. With Brexit, no deal was either a "cliff edge" or a "clean break", depending on where your sympathies lay.
The "physical assailant" metaphor is one way to look at the challenge of coronavirus, but it is not the only one.
Some have taken to social media to complain that the idea of the "surprise attack" disguises the fact that the government had many weeks to prepare a better response to the pandemic than the one it has executed.
People with cancer have long lamented the drawbacks of framing the disease process as a "battle".
And the prime minister's idea that we "wrestle [coronavirus] to the floor" would seem at odds with the patient, precise work that will have to be done, over many months, to keep it at bay.
David Shariatmadari is the author of Don't Believe A Word: The Surprising Truth About Language