My working week: 'I worry about giving a drug user a week's worth of methadone'
The coronavirus pandemic has affected drug and alcohol services and those we are trying to help
It's all hands to the pump to make sure the people we work with can still get their prescriptions. Many have underlying health conditions that make them vulnerable to complications if they catch Covid-19.
We've moved the vast majority of people on daily prescriptions of opioid substitutes to a weekly dose, helping limit how often they need to leave the house to go to the pharmacy. Our staff conduct risk assessments with people over the phone before working with the local GP to change their prescription. It's a truly herculean effort, especially as the majority are working from home.
Opioid substitutes are a vital part of treatment, but giving someone a week's worth of a controlled substance when they are isolating comes with some dangers.
A person may use it all before the week's up, try to sell it on or end up a target for someone looking to exploit them.
I receive an email from Bristol police about illicit drug trends. Supply of spice has almost completely dried up, while the price of cocaine has shot up from £35k a kilo to £45k, and there is reduced supply of crack and heroin.
To some, the idea of less drugs on the street might be a good thing, but what replaces them is usually more dangerous. Purity is going down as dealers are cutting drugs with all kinds of other substances to make up for shortfalls.
I receive emails from other staff members saying some people who use our services have reported being offered the synthetic opioid Fentanyl in place of heroin. Fentanyl is around 50 times stronger than heroin so has a far higher rate of overdose.
The changes in drug supply mean it's vital to keep offering harm reduction services like needle exchange and distribution of the overdose reversal drug naloxone.
Our office remains open for this purpose and the management team ensures the staff follow social distancing guidelines and wear personal protective equipment at all times. Despite this, I still worry about myself and the other staff on duty.
The new system works a bit like a drive through: people talk via an intercom to the staff member on duty, who puts a needle and naloxone pack out in a sterilised bag for them to take away. Everyone is really grateful that the service remains open and say they will clap for our staff on Thursday evening, which is heartwarming.
I receive a call from the wife of a man who was meant to be starting community detox to reduce his drinking this week.
This has to be put on hold for the time being, but it doesn't make it any easier for the family affected. The woman in question works in a care home so can't be with her husband each day and she's terrified that his isolation will lead to him drinking more.
I really empathise with her, but we can't facilitate a nurse coming to their home due to the risk of spreading the virus. I plan to keep checking in with them and explain that we are still running support groups digitally.
I run a group for people in recovery from alcohol abuse. Normally everyone would be sitting in a circle in one of our group rooms but today it's done online. I was worried the technology would prove to be a barrier but everyone seems to manage it fine.
One man attends who has never been to a group in person because he was too anxious. The security of being at home means he's able to share and be heard.
It's amazing to see the recovery community click into action, with people promising to check in on each other over the coming days, especially looking out for those who live alone.
I sign off for the weekend exhausted, but with hope that some good could come out of all this.
Adrian Riley is a team leader at We Are With You in North Somerset