Everton set to fine Moise Kean two weeks' wages following lockdown party
Everton are set to fine Moise Kean two weeks' salary – around £160,000 – with senior executives at the club "appalled" that the Italian forward held a party at his house in direct defiance of coronavirus lockdown restrictions.
Kean was filmed enjoying himself at the gathering despite the government guidance that people should stay at home and not meet friends or family beyond those in their own household.
It is understood Everton will seek to take the strongest possible action against Kean once a club investigation is completed. The maximum sanction available is the deduction of a fortnight's wages. Everton may also ask him to issue an apology in addition to any further potential action.
Kean's behaviour is particularly disquieting for the club given the goodwill for their longstanding Everton in the Community initiative which helps vulnerable people in the area.
In 2015 Evertonians also launched a joint initiative with Liverpool supporters, under the Fans Supporting Foodbanks umbrella, with the banner "Hunger Doesn't Wear Club Colours". Contributions from both clubs have helped to raise £50,000 towards food banks in the area following the start of government restrictions.
In a statement condemning Kean's actions the club stressed the need to respect NHS staff due to their "hard work and sacrifice". It read: "Everton football club was appalled to learn of an incident in which a first-team player ignored government guidance and club policy in relation to the coronavirus crisis.
"The club has strongly expressed its disappointment to the player and made it clear that such actions are completely unacceptable. Everton has regularly stressed the importance of following all the government guidelines – including rules and advice for inside and outside of the home – through a series of official communications to all staff members, including players."
Kean cost a reported £24m last summer from Juventus, where he became the club's youngest debutant in 2016. Yet until the season was postponed he had disappointed, scoring only once in 26 appearances, during the 2-2 draw with Newcastle in January.