Met Office predicts wet weather and falling temperatures this week
'More unsettled' conditions may tempt fewer people outdoors during coronavirus lockdown
The recent run of uninterrupted sunshine and warm weather is to be replaced by wet conditions and falling temperatures across the UK.
It will be a "cooler, more unsettled week" for much of the country as temperatures return to average for this time of year, with some downpours expected, according to the Met Office.
Warm conditions during the UK's fifth weekend in lockdown due to coronavirus prompted concern that people could defy restrictions on movement.
But that seems less likely now the weather is turning for the worse. Forecaster Craig Snell said that across Wales, the Midlands and over towards Yorkshire on Monday, conditions are expected to be cloudy with outbreaks of rain.
Northern England, Northern Ireland and Scotland will see a bright day with a scattering of showers, while south of the M4 corridor could experience the odd shower.
"In that southern zone, we're going to hang on to the warmer air for one more day, so we could see 20C around the London area tomorrow," he said.
The rest of the UK will see cooler spells, especially in the Midlands, where temperatures could dip to 11C or 12C – a significant drop from the highs of 22.4C recorded at Holbeach in Lincolnshire on Sunday. It will be slightly warmer in the north, with temperatures between 14C and 15C.
On Tuesday, a spell of persistent rain is expected to move across parts of England and Wales, while bright spells and scattered showers continue in Northern Ireland and Scotland. Another band of rain will push north-eastwards on Wednesday, according to the Met Office.
Thursday will see scattered showers – some heavy and thundery – across many parts of the UK.
"So on the final day of April, we will actually have a day of April showers across many parts of the UK," Snell said. "A much more different picture from this week where places have just seen blue skies and sunshine.
"Next week, there will be a lot more cloud in the sky and for many of us we will see some rain at some point."