Baby's guard of honour, a special delivery and tour-bus hotels
A parcel reaches 'somewhere in Sheffield' and Captain Tom Moore reportedly makes honours shortlist
Amid the coronavirus crisis, acts of kindness and amazing recoveries offer sparks of hope. In today's roundup, a near centenarian is expected to receive an honour for raising millions of pounds for the NHS, while a postman goes out of his way to deliver a vaguely labelled parcel.
A six-month old baby who was born with a heart condition has beaten coronavirus after spending two weeks on a high dependency unit.
Nurses and doctors at Alder Hey children's hospital in Liverpool formed a guard of honour for Erin Bates as she was moved from isolation to another ward to continue her recovery on Friday.
Erin, from Bury, underwent open heart surgery shortly after birth. She will continue to receive treatment for ongoing conditions at the hospital.
Her mother, Emma Bates, thanked the NHS workers who looked after Erin, describing them as "truly amazing".
The 99-year-old who has raised nearly £29m for the NHS by walking 100 lengths of his garden has reportedly made it on to the honours shortlist.
Captain Tom Moore, who has also topped the UK singles charts with his cover of You'll Never Walk Alone, could receive a CBE after thousands of people nominated him.
The war veteran from Bedfordshire completed the laps of his garden before his 100th birthday on Thursday.
The money he has raised will go to NHS Charities Together to support staff and volunteers working on the frontline during the coronavirus pandemic.
A postman managed to track down the person a parcel was intended for, even though it was addressed only to "somewhere in Sheffield".
Darrell Gilmour, 56, turned to social media to find David Easson's whereabouts after being handed the parcel with a description of him written next to the vague address.
He found Easson, a sports radio presenter, on Facebook and was able to deliver the package containing a gift of Scandinavian chocolate from a fan in Sweden.
Marten Wedebrand, who sent the parcel, told the Yorkshire Post he had written down all the details he knew about Easson, including that he had "a child, a dog, or both."
Tour buses that would usually ferry music stars to venues across the country have been handed over for use as "hotels on wheels" for NHS workers.
Tarrant Anderson, who runs the touring company Vans For Bands, told the BBC that the industry was "on its knees" during the lockdown, but he had moved to help after seeing pictures of exhausted doctors and nurses on social media.
After being checked over to make sure the buses met lockdown guidelines and NHS health and safety standards, they were stationed in hospital car parks to offer respite to staff.