Britain's lockdown diaries expose gulf in wellbeing between rich and poor
A study of 50 Britons over three weeks shows the emotional toll of struggling to stay afloat as incomes shrink
Ted has been buoyant since the first day of lockdown. He is retired and lives in a village near Salisbury with his wife. They are financially secure and "continue to enjoy good health and have all we need at home". He can still garden, cycle and enjoy the countryside. For him, and a fifth of Britons surveyed, it is business as usual.
A collection of lockdown diaries compiled by 50 Britons over three weeks reveals a bleak contrast between those who, like Ted, can afford to cope in the current crisis, and those struggling to feed their families and maintain their physical and mental health.
In a study put together by Britain Thinks, a third of respondents keeping weekly diaries admit they are not coping well. Two fifths have seen their incomes shrink and many are struggling to stay afloat. Mental health is a grave concern with almost half of young people and children in the study reporting a marked rise in anxiety and fear for the future. The gulf in wellbeing between this generation and older, affluent respondents is stark.
One 36-year-old mother from Glasgow has lost her job and the income of her small childcare business. "There is now no routine and I'm going a little crazy," she writes. "I struggle to buy nutritious food; I don't know where my next pay is coming from. I am worried no one knows when this will end." She is overwhelmed by how difficult things are. "I had to leave my 12-year-old in the house with my four-year-old while I went to queue at a shop for some essentials … My heart was racing as I had never left the two of them in the house by themselves."
Emotionally, the mood of the nation has plummeted. Prior to the pandemic, YouGov polling showed 50% of Britons said they were happy. This is down to 26% while stress has surged. In week one, logged in March, hopeful, calm and grateful were the terms most used by diarists reflecting on the situation. People appreciated life slowing down and having the opportunity to reconnect with old friends online. A third said they thought they would learn a new skill.
By the end of week three, the novelty of baking and bonding with family had worn thin. Worried, frustrated and bored were the descriptors most used to describe the current situation. The diarists represent Britons in a range of life stages and working situations: from families with children under five through to vulnerable, older people, small business owners to gig economy workers. The majority say they are adjusting to a lot of change in their daily lives – and most say they are managing it. The hardest hit and most likely to be affected by increased financial and emotional stress were women, 18- to 24- year-olds and those from lower socio-economic backgrounds.
Despite reporting a sense of wearied monotony, support for lockdown remains high across social demographics: 63% would be nervous about going out even if lockdown were lifted, with the biggest divergence in priorities seen between younger and older people. Small things – going to the pub, being able to go to the shops – are most missed rather than big one-off events or holidays. Two thirds of people say they simply want a sense of normality in their lives.
Criticism over a lack of testing and PPE equipment was vocal across the board. Over half of respondents feel Britain is faring worse than other European countries in its handling of the situation and 71% want the government to publish an exit strategy.
The crisis is fostering national unity. All the documented failures withstanding, many still feel the government is doing the best it can and dislike those criticising it.
For Sam, 26, a Masters student who lives at home with his parents and sister in Manchester, this doesn't tally and he is extremely anxious about the increasing death rate. "I'm losing more and more confidence in the government … I'm feeling like the situation in the UK is getting worse and that we are unable to help."
Trust in medical experts and the NHS has gone up each week and appreciation for delivery drivers and supermarket workers is high. "They're so brave for staying at work and aren't getting the appreciation they deserve," noted one diary, while another cheered "the scientists working overtime behind the scenes to develop vaccines and tests".
The feeling towards Virgin, Wetherspoons and Sports Direct is less enthusiastic with all singled out for "behaving badly"; 90% of people polled by Edelman said brands must try to protect the wellbeing and financial security of their employees and suppliers, even if it means suffering big losses during the pandemic. Many diarists admit to watching how brands responded.
As the threat of an economic depression looms, the public mood is gloomy towards the future of the country but more optimistic about individual personal circumstances. Diarists are expecting banks to step up. As one wrote: "The British taxpayer bailed them out back in 2008, perhaps it's time [they] give something back to the people who helped them."
Names have been changed by request