Children could be recruited by gangs during lockdown, report says
Children's commissioner says thousands of young people are at a heightened risk
A "real risk" exists of criminal gangs recruiting young people out of school during the coronavirus lockdown, the children's commissioner for England has warned in a report on deprivation in England.
The report by Anne Longfield said hundreds of thousands of young people are off the radar of "early warning systems" such as schools, putting them at heightened risk. It calls for the government to ensure that councils and teachers stay in touch with those most vulnerable to exploitation, and those suffering the "toxic trio" of domestic violence, substance misuse and mental illness at home. The findings are part of a paper focusing on the deprivation endured by England's most vulnerable families
"While the government's decision to keep schools open for the most vulnerable children is welcome, sadly most of them are just not showing up," Longfield said.
"They are most likely at home, often exposed to a cocktail of secondary risks – a lack of food in the house, sofa-surfing or cramped living conditions, neglect, or experiencing acute difficulties due to parental domestic violence, substance abuse and mental health problems. Many will be caring for parents or siblings themselves in these incredibly difficult circumstances."
Longfield's report comes after the Department for Education's (DfE) own figures showed that just 5% of pupils identified as vulnerable were attending school in England. The Guardian reported that headteachers were making daily calls to pupils at home to make sure they were safe, along with continuing to provide meals and other support.
The report said the lockdown has removed many of the usual ways of identifying children at risk, with schools and other community hubs, including doctors' surgeries, youth centres, children's centres and libraries also closed.
Longfield said she wants to see schools working with local authorities to ensure that all children known to be vulnerable are still being seen by professionals.
"I applaud the efforts of some schools and councils to ensure vulnerable children are still being visited by teachers or social workers. I'd like to see this extend throughout the country," she said.
The report and data collected by the children's commissioner found huge variations among local authorities in different categories of deprivation and vulnerability throughout England.
The DfE said local authorities were receiving additional funding of £3.2bn to cope with pressures caused by the coronavirus lockdown, including in children's social care, and that it had set up teams around the country to improve its information on the risks facing vulnerable children.
"Schools and early years settings remain open for vulnerable children, who are encouraged to attend where it is appropriate for them to do so. We thank social workers and everyone involved in keeping these children safe at this time for their hard work, including continuing to conduct risk assessments and home visits where needed," the DfE said.
But Rebecca Long-Bailey, the shadow education secretary, said the government could not ignore Longfield's warnings of the heightened risks.
"Yesterday, the government significantly relaxed statutory duties on local authorities to protect vulnerable children. In light of this report, it is even more urgent that the government guarantees these changes will not adversely impact children in need and commits to reversing them if there is any evidence they are doing so.
"Ministers must also alleviate the financial pressures on families which may be making the situation even worse, including ensuring urgent access to food where the free school meal voucher scheme is failing," Long-Bailey said.