Twin sisters, one a nurse in Southampton, two of the latest to die from coronavirus
Katy and Emma Davis among recent victims, who include a BNP member who found Islam
We would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died from Covid-19. You can get in touch by filling in the form below, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your contributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss further.
Katy and Emma Davis among recent victims, who include a BNP member who found Islam
Twin sisters, one of whom was a nurse, are among the latest victims to have died from coronavirus.
Children's nurse Katy Davis, 37, died at Southampton general hospital on Tuesday. On Friday her identical twin sister, Emma, died at the same hospital.
Their sister, Zoe, told the BBC: "They always said they had come into the world together and would go out together as well."
Zoe Davis said the "amazing" pair, who lived together, had underlying health conditions and had been unwell for some time.
Katy is the latest of more than 100 British health workers who have died from coronavirus.
Paula Head, chief executive at University Hospital Southampton, said: "Katy has been described by her colleagues where she worked in child health as a nurse people would aspire to be like, and that nursing was more than just a job to her. On behalf of everyone here at UHS, including our patients and the communities we serve, I would like to offer our sincere condolences to her family."
Among some of the other recent victims is a former British National party member who found Islam and spent the last decade of his life as a respected social worker.
Muhammad Islam, who grew up in the 1960s in Gateshead as John Ord, died on Thursday after contracting Covid-19. In 2005 he recounted to the Guardian how he had joined the BNP as a 16-year-old. He became a Muslim after stumbling on a copy of the Qur'an in 1989. He changed his name and settled in Birmingham, married a primary school teacher from a Pakistani background, and started a degree in social work.
Since 2010 he had worked for Birmingham Children's Trust, helping young people leaving care. Its chief executive, Andy Couldrick, said he died after suffering with Covid-19 for a few weeks. He said: "Muhammad was a well respected, well liked and highly valued member of our care leavers team who supported many young people in Birmingham."
Ruth Allen, chief executive of the British Association of Social Workers, said: "Social workers continue to work tirelessly, knocking on doors, delivering vital services out in communities."
-tributes-and-memories
The death of an 88-year-old woman in south Wales highlights the lack of protection against the virus in hospices, according to her family.
John Hunt suspects that his mother, Elsie Hunt, contracted the virus in a hospice before she died earlier this month in Singleton hospital, Swansea.
He said: "Already gravely ill, Covid-19 robbed her of being consoled by her family in her last days. In the hospice, no one wore masks. Even when Mum developed a classic dry cough and fever – and was moved to a single room – staff only wore simple paper masks, and no eye protection."
He said he could see his mother in her final days via FaceTime.