Inflight meals, a 36-hour bike ride, and toddler hears via magic of the internet
Girl has implant switched on remotely, charity saves unused meals, and boy, 12, completes epic ride for NHS
In these challenging times, joy can be found in the most unusual places. From toddler medical marvels to pedal-powered pre-teens, here's a round-up of today's uplifting stories to brighten your day.
An 18-month-old girl has been able to hear for the first time after medics were able to switch on a cochlear implant remotely. Audiologists at the University of Southampton created a link over the internet in order to turn the device on for Margarida Cibrao-Roque, the first time such a procedure has been carried out in the UK.
Professor Helen Cullington, of the university's auditory implant service, conducted the switch-on from her home, linking remotely with the toddler's parents at their home in Camberley, Surrey.
She said: "Usually we do the switch-on of a cochlear implant at our clinic at the university, but with some technical creativity and some advice from colleagues in Australia, we were able to do everything necessary over the internet.
"The session went really well and everyone was thrilled with the outcome."
The child's mother, Joana Cibrao, said: "The Southampton team were amazing. I cannot praise them enough really, the effort of the team - they were just brilliant and they made it happen. The possibility of Margarida calling me Mummy one day would mean the world."
Over a million frozen airline meals have been saved from going to waste after plans were announced to distribute them to people in need across Greater Manchester.
The meals were preserved by Open Kitchen MCR after being labelled as "waste" following the cancellation of flights due to the lockdown. The frozen meals are being stored in a large freezer operated by the cold storage company Lineage Logistics.
A 12-year-old boy has raised £4,100 by cycling 740km (460 miles) during a 36-hour indoor cycling challenge to accompany Tour de France winner Geraint Thomas.
Mak Larkin, from Hastings, East Sussex, set himself the target of riding three 12-hour shifts with the Olympic gold medallist using the indoor cycling app Zwift to raise money for NHS Charities Together. Larkin's mother, Lynsey, said Mak had received messages of support from around the world, including good wishes from the cyclists Tom Pidcock, Cameron Mason, Ben Tulett and Team Ineos.
She added: "He was overwhelmed and couldn't believe he had actually done it. He rested but was eager to get back on the saddle for a gentle spin 48 hours after."