The volunteers making PPE on the homefront for UK health workers
Experienced machinists to first-time sewers are helping to provide coronavirus kit
As frontline medical staff continue to experience critical shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE), people across the UK have been attempting to support health workers by creating their own.
From retired fashion seamstresses and first-time sewers to faith groups and school teachers, the Guardian has spoken to some of those working to make PPE at home.
"Our youngest volunteer is a little boy of six with cystic fibrosis, he's sewing away with his mum supervising. The oldest is a lady of 91 who just wanted to do her bit, so she's adding buttons to all of the caps," said Susan McDonnell, who runs a group of around 700 people across Somerset sewing scrubs and washbags for healthcare staff.
"Some people in the group can't sew, but I haven't turned anybody away, we'll find them jobs picking the orders or sorting things," she said.
Taunton, where McDonnell lives, used to house a factory making Pierre Cardin shirts, and many of the factory staff have come out of retirement to use their skills and industrial sewing machines to make clothes for healthcare staff.
The group have set up a small warehouse in a local driving school, which has emptied due to the cancellation of classes. From here, materials are sent to volunteers sewing at home, and finished scrubs are collected and sorted, with the driving school staff responsible for deliveries. They are able to deliver up to 200 scrubs and 1,000 bags each day.
Fabric has come from donations from local people, purchases by the volunteers, and fabric suppliers offering discounted rates.
"Our volunteers have made such massive efforts, donating so much time and money even if they aren't very well off. It's a reminder that it's not all doom, there are good things happening," McDonnell added.
In Redditch, Sarah Baker, a seamstress, had to close her studio when the pandemic cancelled all of her work. "With proms and wedding season, this is normally the busiest time of year, but all my work stopped, even down to shortening trousers," she said.
Her final customer before closing was an NHS nurse, who told her of the shortages of scrubs and asked if she might be able to make some. She found a pattern online, got it checked and approved, and joined a national group called For the Love of Scrubs, which coordinates sewing volunteers nationwide. Her scrubs are predominantly being sent to the local hospital where her son was born.
"It's fantastic," she said. "I'm very happy to support them. It feels like a bit of a war effort, we're all doing what we can."
Others are making visors for healthcare staff. At Chiltern academy in Bedfordshire, Dan Pallett, a design and technology teacher, discovered a growing movement of teachers across the UK using their resources to make PPE, and decided to join in. Colleagues in neighbouring schools offered to help, and the group now has almost 20 staff members, from PE teachers to administration staff.
The PPE has predominantly been donated to local hospitals and care homes in and around Luton, but has also reached healthcare staff from Glasgow and the East of England ambulance service.
Pallett is being supported by Discover Islam, a grassroots organisation in Luton that facilitates and highlights the contributions of the Muslim community to wider society. It has raised more than £20,000 to support local people during the coronavirus outbreak, and paid for almost all of the materials for the 7,500 visors produced at Chiltern academy, as well as providing lunch every day for Pallett's volunteers.
Sufian Sadiq, the chair of Discover Islam, said: "We came across Dan's work and could see that it was difficult because you can't buy all of the plastic out of school budgets. He has the skill, willingness and volunteers, but what he didn't have was the resources. We said we'd provide whatever they needed in terms of finance and material to enable them to carry on production. We're just so happy we can contribute."
In Ramsgate, Kent, Chatham &amp; Clarendon grammar school has been working with the local fire brigade over the past four weeks to make more than 20,000 visors, which have been sent to prisons, hospitals and doctors' surgeries from London to Exeter.
"It started with staff and students at the school, then ex-students and retired staff. Then other schools donated materials, and their staff wanted to get involved too. There are lots of local people who want to help out, even if it's just dropping off tea and coffee," said Thomas Brewin, head of design and technology at the school.
"It gives a little bit of mental health support for those who want to help, people feel they've made a difference, and it is fun. I felt that if you've got the ability to do something, you're almost obligated to step up," he added. "It beats sitting at home."