Government urged to increase child benefit to help poorer UK families
Charities call for extra £10 a week per child to help those struggling during coronavirus lockdown
Three major anti-poverty charities are calling on the government to increase child benefits amid growing evidence that the coronavirus shutdown is disproportionately affecting poorer families.
Turn2us, Action for Children and the Joseph Rowntree Foundation have all called for families to receive an extra £10 or £20 a week for each child after research found that more than 10 million children – in nearly 6m households – are facing financial crisis due to the pandemic.
Citing ongoing problems, five-week waits to receive universal credit and delays to vouchers for free school meals, Action for Children has warned that many of the UK's poorest families have little or no savings and have been left teetering on the brink.
Carol Iddon, the deputy chief executive at Action for Children, said the charity's frontline staff were "battling to help frightened families come out the other side of this but are overwhelmed by the sheer desperation of those who are only a pay cheque away from no longer being able to keep their children warm and well fed".
The charity has launched an emergency appeal. But, said Iddon, "the government must act, too, and use the most effective way we have of getting help to children, by increasing child benefit by £10 a week."
The charity warned of a stark north-south divide in family savings with those in the north-east the least likely to have money set aside for the crisis. Just 29% have some savings, it said, compared with the south-east where far more families had reserves to call on.
Tom Lawson, the chief executive of Turn2us, said the current crisis threatened to push more children into poverty. His organisation also has an appeal for help.
"There are already 4.5 million children in the UK living in poverty. Ultimately, families need more support to see them through this crisis and we urge the government to intervene and increase child benefit payments, which have been subject to freezes since 2011."
He said that 2.2m households, including 2.5 million children, are currently unable to afford rent or mortgage payments.
A large number of families are anticipating a significant drop in their income with 11% of households expecting their net household income to drop below £1,000 in April. This corresponds to 1.9 million children affected by this drop, he warned.
Iain Porter, of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, said an increase of at least £20 per child per week to the child element of universal credit and child tax credits would help families with children to weather the "worst of the storm".
"Without the urgent provision of a targeted lifeline for children, millions already trapped in poverty face deepening hardship, and many more risk being swept into poverty alongside them. We are therefore calling for a just emergency intervention, targeted to mitigate the immediate strain on low-income families," he said.
The Department for Work and Pensions said:"
"We are doing whatever it takes to ensure people are supported through these unprecedented times, implementing an enormous package of measures, including increased universal credit payments, the coronavirus job retention scheme, statutory sick pay, mortgage holidays and greater protection for renters."