'We're all approaching burnout': paramedics on the toll of tackling coronavirus
Frontline NHS staff are dealing with a sharp rise in the number of people dying at home, high volumes of calls and PPE shortages
Paramedics are under pressure as callouts to coronavirus-related incidents rise. They are also finding more people dead at home. Shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE), delays to testing and stressful situations are taking their toll on these professionals' physical and mental health.
Here, four paramedics relate their working conditions as the Covid-19 pandemic rips through the UK.
I'm attending at least four or five cardiac arrests a week, compared with one or two a week before the pandemic. That's at least triple the number. My colleagues are experiencing this as well.
We were expecting more autonomy to pronounce more people dead at home but that hasn't happened yet. Our policies for when and how to resuscitate people haven't changed since before the coronavirus outbreak began. It's got to the point where, in some cases, we take people to hospital. When we get there, doctors are coming up to the back of the ambulance and pronouncing them dead there. They're not attempting further resuscitation.
On top of this, we don't have enough PPE. We've been arguing for weeks that it's not safe for us. Some paramedics are refusing to treat patients unless they have the appropriate PPE.
We're all approaching burnout. A lot of us have had holidays cancelled because of the lockdown. I'm absolutely exhausted and I need downtime at home to process it all.
Paramedic, north-west England
There's a high call volume at the moment, and a lot of cardiac arrests. Most of them could be linked to Covid-19.
One patient I went to who died was self-isolating along with his family. He was a high-risk patient because he had underlying health conditions and had a temperature and a cough. He hadn't been tested but it sounded like it was Covid-19. That won't go down as one of the recorded deaths because they hadn't been tested.
As a healthcare professional, I would recognise certain symptoms getting worse, treat them and take them to hospital. When people are at home and isolated, we're getting to them too late.
For someone with diabetes or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) it wouldn't take much to tip them over the edge. It's quite scary. There are lots more deaths out there that aren't being counted.
There is a lack of PPE. Some days you can go and get it, other days we're having to beg for it. Sometimes you haven't got it. If you're two minutes away from someone who is arresting with no PPE, you can't attend. Another ambulance has to be sent. We're put in the position of do we leave it, or go in and put our families at risk?
We shouldn't have to make those decisions. It seems very inhumane.
Paramedic, east England
It feels like 75% of the jobs we go to are coronavirus-related. The service has cut paramedics and increased ambulances. Instead of having two paramedics on an ambulance, you have one and a firefighter or a volunteer to drive the vehicle.
We are going to more people that we are pronouncing dead. We'd average one a week normally, but a week ago I was doing three or four a day. A few weeks ago, my small team saw nine people in a day die at home. Pre-coronavirus, that would never have happened.
When a call comes in from the public we just get told someone's not breathing. When we get there, we need to put PPE on. It's stressful. These are the kinds of jobs where we want to – and the public expects us to – run in like superheroes, but we can't.
My impression is that people are getting a lot more unwell in a short period. We're seeing a lot of people who have been diagnosed with Covid-19. Everything seemed all right and suddenly they got a lot worse. There's no way of predicting that.
Policy and procedure in ambulance services is changing all the time. At one point, we were told if we were going to a potential coronavirus patient, we'd have to fill out loads of contact tracing forms. Two days later, that got binned.
In the early days of the outbreak, we didn't have many masks and ambulances couldn't be dispatched because they didn't have one between them. We have enough now, but the plastic our aprons are made of is about the thickness of cling film and doesn't cover our whole body.
Paramedic, London
If we don't think someone's sick enough to go into hospital we leave them because if someone's got a respiratory condition, like COPD, and they go into A&amp;E where they can potentially contract coronavirus, there's another life gone.
Usually I would see two cardiac arrests a week. Now it's up to three. I don't think coronavirus is going to hit us here as badly as places like London and Manchester because we are so spread out.
I had one job last week where the person was dead on arrival. I don't know whether it was coronavirus; I don't have a testing facility on me but you sort of presume that someone with respiratory problems had contracted it and that's what killed them. When you go out to people who are dead on arrival and the partner is there you think, "Are they going to die now?"
Paramedic, Northern Ireland