Anaesthetists report coronavirus concerns over inadequate PPE
Anaesthetists play key role in treating the seriously unwell, but 73% fear for own health
Three-quarters of anaesthetists treating Covid-19 patients in hospital fear their own health will suffer because they cannot get the protective equipment they need.
Anaesthetists are working at the frontline despite being at "a significant and personal risk" because of the NHS-wide shortage of kit, the Royal College of Anaesthetists (RCoA) warns.
Anaesthetists play a key role in looking after seriously unwell patients, including those in intensive care, beyond their better-known role in operating theatres. But with most routine operations suspended, many are now working alongside specialist intensive care doctors in ICUs to help care for the thousands of people with the disease receiving life or death care.
In a survey of more than 2,000 anaesthetists last week, 73% said they were concerned for their own health as a direct result of what they saw as inadequate personal protective equipment (PPE).
A quarter said they have recently felt pressurised to treat Covid-positive patients when they cannot access the PPE they believe they need to reduce the risk of becoming infected.
Prof Ravi Mahajan, the RCoA's president, said that the findings were a concern, especially because anaesthetists "are one of the groups of doctors and healthcare workers which are at highest risk of exposure to Covid-19 when treating critically ill patients".
The survey's findings also suggest that:
38% of anaesthetists have not been able to get a test for coronavirus.
33% have felt physically unwell in the last month.
40% have suffered mental distress in that time as a result of the stress involved in treating Covid-19 patients.
14% are so mentally or physically exhausted that they are at risk of burnout.
"These survey findings make for concerning reading. They highlight the immense pressures our members are dealing with as they continue to provide outstanding care to the many seriously unwell Covid-19 patients," said Mahajan.
"The college is concerned that the short-term and long-term wellbeing of anaesthetists is at risk due to ongoing pressures they face while caring for ill patients."
Meanwhile, the NHS Confederation, which represents healthcare providers in England, warned that while supply of PPE to hospitals had improved, shortages are still causing problems elsewhere.
"Real issues continue in care homes, GP and community services, while supplies have improved for hospitals. There is a global supply problem with stock and the agents that make them in short supply.
"The impact is that health leaders and their staff live in fear and uncertainty about what equipment they'll receive, not helped when we continue to hear of domestic companies offering their support and being ignored, with some then shifting their supplies to other countries," said Niall Dickson, the organisation's chief executive.
"One member told us today that they were expecting a crate of gear, only to receive a single box, leading them to manufacture their own gowns and scrubs. There are millions of shipments but the NHS is following guidance and getting through it rapidly," Dickson added.