GP calls for action after 125 of her care home patients die of Covid-19
Lack of coherent strategy for coronavirus fuels fears of devastating death toll
"I am really angry about this," said Dr Anna Down, scanning her computer for figures to show how coronavirus has ravaged her patients living in nursing homes.
"One home had 23 deaths, another lost 19, and another 13," the Ealing GP said. "In two units 50% of residents died in the space of 10 days."
Down is the clinical lead at a practice with 1,000 residents on its books in 15 privately run nursing homes in the area of west London hit harder than anywhere in Britain by Covid-19 deaths in the first weeks of the outbreak. In a normal month, she might expect to lose around 28 people. In the last month she has lost 125.
Down has a warning to the rest of the country informed by her practice's experience: reform how social care handles Covid-19 or face rising deaths and a second devastating wave of infection.
Her anger goes beyond grief. Her early warnings to public health authorities about the risks to care residents were not acted on, she said; infected patients continue to be discharged into care homes from hospitals, spreading the virus; and staff shortages are blighting attempts to keep the virus isolated.
High-protection FFP3 face masks requested so staff could treat residents with "aerosol-producing" lung problems and tracheostomies never came. Carers were left to spread the disease and fell ill.
"From the moment this started we highlighted where the problems were going to be and said we can get on top of this now," Down said. "Yet no definitive and timely action was taken across the health and social care system."
The last few weeks have been devastating on the frontline. The manager of the Ealing home where 23 people died in just two weeks described conditions as "terrible".
"I have never written so many death notifications in such a short time," she said, on condition of anonymity. "Every member of staff is lost. They don't know what to do. In one of our units with 21 residents we lost nine people in three days. It's OK when you hear the numbers on TV. They are removed from reality. One day a resident was walking around with a mild temperature. I went home and the next morning they were dead."
The manager repeated a refrain heard in care homes everywhere at the moment: "There is so much focus on the NHS but there is little done for care homes.
"The staffing situation is getting critical. I have seven nurses and 12 care assistants off. The care home sector needs help: staff, protection and volunteers. This has been going on since the beginning of April and I still think we are heading for the worst."
Ministers admit official figures understate the scale of problems in care and nursing homes. Niall Dickson, the head of the NHS Confederation, described care this week as "the second front". It may yet become the main battleground.
Official figures on Tuesday put the impact on Covid-19 on care homes at just over 1,000 fatalities to 10 April. But HC One, the biggest private provider, has alone lost almost 500 people to confirmed or suspected Covid-19 and the virus is active in 120 of its 328 homes. Given there are more than 15,000 care homes in England and Wales, Prof Martin Green, the chief executive of sector association Care England, predicts care home deaths will outstrip hospital fatalities (17,337 in England and Wales by Tuesday).
Yet demands for social care to be urgently reconfigured with NHS-style "whatever it takes" resourcing are yet to be met.
Down has ideas, if anyone will listen. Given isolating Covid-19 sufferers within homes frequently fails, there need to be "hot homes" for accepting Covid-positive discharged from hospitals and "cold homes" for those without the virus. She describes them as "the equivalent of the Nightingale hospitals for nursing homes".
Down believes homes are inadequately staffed to deal with the volume and intensity of demand and need nursing support from local hospitals. Staff need to be tested "early and often", and there needs to be central management of discharged hospital patients so they are put in the safest, rather than most available vacancy.
"In terms of deaths, I don't think we have peaked yet," she said. "Every time people die, more people are discharged into the homes from hospital. Without a new strategy it's not going to stop."
The North West London Collaboration of Clinical Commissioning Groups declined to comment. The Department of Health and Social Care has been contacted.
In recent days the UK has seen a sudden sharp increase in Covid-19 infection numbers, leading to fears that a second wave of cases is beginning.
Epidemics of infectious diseases behave in different ways but the1918 influenza pandemicthat killed more than 50 million people is regarded as a key example of a pandemic that occurred in multiple waves, with the latter more severe than the first. It has been replicated – albeit more mildly – in subsequent flu pandemics. Until now that had been what was expected from Covid-19.
How and why multiple-wave outbreaks occur, and how subsequent waves of infection can be prevented, has become a staple of epidemiological modelling studies and pandemic preparation, which have looked at everything from social behaviour and health policy to vaccination and the buildup of community immunity, also known as herd immunity.
This is being watched very carefully. Without a vaccine, and with no widespread immunity to the new disease, one alarm is being sounded by the experience of Singapore, which has seen a suddenresurgence in infectionsdespite being lauded for its early handling of the outbreak.
Although Singapore instituted a strong contact tracing system for its general population, the disease re-emerged incramped dormitory accommodationused by thousands of foreign workers with inadequate hygiene facilities and shared canteens.
Singapore's experience, although very specific, has demonstrated the ability of the disease to come back strongly in places where people are in close proximity and its ability to exploit any weakness in public health regimes set up to counter it.
In June 2020, Beijing suffered from a new cluster of coronavirus cases which caused authorities to re-implement restrictions that China had previously been able to lift. In the UK, the city of Leicester was unable to come out of lockdown because of the development of a new spike of coronavirus cases. Clusters also emerged in Melbourne, requiring a re-imposition of lockdown conditions.
Conventional wisdom among scientists suggests second waves of resistant infections occur after the capacity for treatment and isolation becomes exhausted. In this case the concern is that the social and political consensus supporting lockdowns is being overtaken by public frustration and the urgent need to reopen economies.
However Linda Bauld, professor of public health at the University of Edinburgh, says "'Second wave' isn't a term that we would use at the current time, as the virus hasn't gone away, it's in our population, it has spread to 188 countries so far, and what we are seeing now is essentially localised spikes or a localised return of a large number of cases."
The overall threat declines when susceptibility of the population to the disease falls below a certain threshold or when widespread vaccination becomes available.
In general terms the ratio of susceptible and immune individuals in a population at the end of one wave determines the potential magnitude of a subsequent wave. The worry is that witha vaccine still many months away, and the real rate of infection only being guessed at, populations worldwide remain highly vulnerable to both resurgence and subsequent waves.
Peter Beaumont,Emma Graham-Harrison <i>and</i> Martin Belam
The deaths are all personal disasters. Another manager in Ealing described how the deaths of six people in short order left her staff "panicking".
"It came as quite a shock," she said. "It happened so quickly – boom. We had little information about the right protocol on PPE, there were never clear guidelines on isolating, sending people to hospital, whether to wear masks."
Her home still faces a PPE shortage and cannot afford the prices of kit on the open market. Ministers may have promised £3.2bn to councils to help the Covid-19 response, but requests for financial aid to the local authorities to buy scarce essentials such as hand gel – "like gold dust" – has yielded nothing yet. Testing has been slow too. Swabs were sent from two residents, but results never came back. One of them died.
The Department of Health and Social Care said: "We are ramping up testing to ensure all symptomatic staff and residents are tested, as well as testing all patients before they are discharged back to their care home - in addition to recently-updated hospital discharge guidance.
"So far we have delivered nearly 1 billion items of PPE across the health and social care system within England and are working closely with the ONS, PHE and the CQC to better understand the worrying number of deaths from Covid-19 in care homes and how we can prevent them."