'This is beyond anything we have ever seen': the fire crews tackling Covid-19
From body removal and driving ambulances to fitting clinicians' face masks, UK firefighters are volunteering for vital new roles
"Seeing how families are being torn apart is really distressing and sad," says Bill Pitt. "As firefighters, we want to be out there and to be reassuring."
Pitt, a firefighter in the West Midlands, was one of the first in the region to join new teams of police, ambulance and fire crews to help move the bodies of people known or suspected to have died of Covid-19. As the Fire Brigade Union (FBU) health and safety officer for the region, he was keen to assess the risks involved for the UK firefighters volunteering in huge numbers to perform vital new roles in the pandemic.
While some of their usual duties have been scaled back or suspended, firefighters and support staff are stepping in to provide additional resources for hard-pressed public services, such as ambulance services, which are receiving a record number of calls. As well as ensuring bodies are safely prepared to be moved, new tasks include driving ambulances, ensuring clinicians' face masks are fitted correctly, delivering PPE to frontline staff and taking food and medicine to vulnerable people.
It is part of the response to the crisis organised by local resilience forums, which include police, councils and other public services.
Alex Johnson, chief fire officer for South Yorkshire fire and rescue, says firefighters and support staff responded immediately to the call for volunteers. "My firefighters have received, unpacked and delivered nearly one million pieces of PPE for social care staff," she says. Community safety officers, who usually visit people in their homes, are identifying vulnerable people and coordinating support for them.
The FBU has expressed concern that its members may face additional hazards and is worried about a potential lack of PPE and training for fire staff. But Johnson assures she wouldn't let any member of staff carry out tasks without correct PPE or training.
"I can't say how proud I am of all the volunteers who have come forward. I can't think of anybody better placed to step into these additional roles," she says. "The response has been outstanding."
Five new tasks for firefighters were included in an agreement struck at the end of March between the FBU, fire chiefs and fire and rescue employers, with three more – antigen testing, driving non-blue light ambulance transport and training new ambulance drivers – added last week.
But as firefighters' roles increase in the crisis, so do concerns about their health. "It has been been quite tricky, because there is pressure on employers and fire chiefs, from the government, and primarily from the Home Office, just to get things done quickly," says the FBU general secretary, Matt Wrack.
The union wants to ensure any additional roles are appropriate and do not detract from core fire service work, and that all staff receive necessary protective equipment and training, he adds.
The number of fire staff affected by the virus has increased with some 3,000 fire and rescue staff now self-isolating. The union says members' safety remains a priority. "Chief officers may get a call for support and say yes without thinking through all the implications," says Wrack. "We need to ensure that proper risk assessment, PPE and training are all in place. If our members are moving bodies, for instance, they need to know the correct processes on how to do that."
Despite safety concerns, Wrack says firefighters and control staff have always stepped in when the public is in danger and this crisis is no different.
In the West Midlands, Pitt points out that fire services have experience of moving bodies. What's different now, though, is the scale of demand. "Before, there were rare occasions where we might be called to assist the police with body retrieval, especially if it was in a difficult location," he says. "But this is beyond anything we have seen before. It feels very surreal. We never thought we would see this."
Teams are moving bodies out of hospitals, care homes and homes. "Our paramount aim is maintaining the dignity of that person who has sadly passed away," says Pitt. "We treat that member of the public like a member of our own family."
Pitt says it will be important to spread the new tasks between volunteer staff, to limit individuals' exposure and stress. "It is very distressing work and very physical work, too." Before firefighters take on the new tasks, they have psychological training, covering emotional resilience, compassion and the dangers of burnout, and there is access to a 24/7 counselling service.
Other areas are experiencing what they fear may be the calm before the storm. Karen Adams, FBU secretary for Dorset and Wiltshire, where many firefighters have also volunteered for the new duties, says the main task at the moment in her region is to support local services, including ambulance services.
But fire staff are ready to help, and have all the PPE they need, she says. "We have been really pleased with how our service has responded to keep our people safe."