Boris Johnson speaks to Donald Trump from Chequers
PM will have telephone audience with the Queen while he recovers from coronavirus
Boris Johnson has spoken to Donald Trump and will have a telephone audience with the Queen this week, even though No 10 continues to insist he is not doing any government work while he recovers from coronavirus at Chequers.
In recent days the UK has seen a sudden sharp increase in Covid-19 infection numbers, leading to fears that a second wave of cases is beginning.
Epidemics of infectious diseases behave in different ways but the1918 influenza pandemicthat killed more than 50 million people is regarded as a key example of a pandemic that occurred in multiple waves, with the latter more severe than the first. It has been replicated – albeit more mildly – in subsequent flu pandemics. Until now that had been what was expected from Covid-19.
How and why multiple-wave outbreaks occur, and how subsequent waves of infection can be prevented, has become a staple of epidemiological modelling studies and pandemic preparation, which have looked at everything from social behaviour and health policy to vaccination and the buildup of community immunity, also known as herd immunity.
This is being watched very carefully. Without a vaccine, and with no widespread immunity to the new disease, one alarm is being sounded by the experience of Singapore, which has seen a suddenresurgence in infectionsdespite being lauded for its early handling of the outbreak.
Although Singapore instituted a strong contact tracing system for its general population, the disease re-emerged incramped dormitory accommodationused by thousands of foreign workers with inadequate hygiene facilities and shared canteens.
Singapore's experience, although very specific, has demonstrated the ability of the disease to come back strongly in places where people are in close proximity and its ability to exploit any weakness in public health regimes set up to counter it.
In June 2020, Beijing suffered from a new cluster of coronavirus cases which caused authorities to re-implement restrictions that China had previously been able to lift. In the UK, the city of Leicester was unable to come out of lockdown because of the development of a new spike of coronavirus cases. Clusters also emerged in Melbourne, requiring a re-imposition of lockdown conditions.
Conventional wisdom among scientists suggests second waves of resistant infections occur after the capacity for treatment and isolation becomes exhausted. In this case the concern is that the social and political consensus supporting lockdowns is being overtaken by public frustration and the urgent need to reopen economies.
However Linda Bauld, professor of public health at the University of Edinburgh, says "'Second wave' isn't a term that we would use at the current time, as the virus hasn't gone away, it's in our population, it has spread to 188 countries so far, and what we are seeing now is essentially localised spikes or a localised return of a large number of cases."
The overall threat declines when susceptibility of the population to the disease falls below a certain threshold or when widespread vaccination becomes available.
In general terms the ratio of susceptible and immune individuals in a population at the end of one wave determines the potential magnitude of a subsequent wave. The worry is that witha vaccine still many months away, and the real rate of infection only being guessed at, populations worldwide remain highly vulnerable to both resurgence and subsequent waves.
Peter Beaumont,Emma Graham-Harrison <i>and</i> Martin Belam
The prime minister spoke to the US president on Tuesday afternoon to "thank Trump for his good wishes while he was unwell", but also took the opportunity to talk about the G7's efforts to combat the virus and reaffirm his desire for a UK-US trade agreement.
A Downing Street spokesman said: "The leaders agreed on the importance of a coordinated international response to coronavirus, including through the G7 – which the US currently chairs. They also discussed continued UK-US cooperation in the fight against the pandemic. The leaders committed to continue working together to strengthen our bilateral relationship, including by signing a free trade agreement as soon as possible."
The White House said the prime minister "shared that he is feeling better and on the road to recovery".
Johnson will also have a telephone audience with the Queen later this week, probably on Wednesday or Thursday, after missing several weeks because of his illness.
The prime minister has also been making calls to government ministers as he seeks updates on the response to the virus, amid continuing criticism of the effort to get personal protective equipment to the NHS and care homes as well as the failure to ramp up testing to promised levels.
His spokesman told a Westminster briefing: "The prime minister is continuing his recovery at Chequers and isn't formally doing government work.
"He has been receiving updates from No 10 on the coronavirus response and has spoken with the first secretary of state and senior members of his team.
"Yesterday he sent a message of condolence to Justin Trudeau after the very sad loss of life in the shooting in Canada.
"Later today, at around about 2pm, he will be speaking with President Trump."
Johnson went to Chequers to recuperate after spending a week in hospital, including three days in intensive care, when his breathing deteriorated.
He has been off work for just over two weeks, with Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary and first secretary of state, deputising for him in the meantime.
During his absence, there have been complaints of a power vacuum and criticism over key issues such as how the UK will eventually try to ease the lockdown.