Pupils begin studying at home – a challenge for them, parents and teachers
Schools provide online classes, but some pupils struggle to stay motivated after cancelled exams
Millions of children in the UK returned to their schoolwork on Monday for the first day of the summer term. But for the first time in recent memory the majority did so from home.
Through videoconference classes, assigned written exercises and self-study, teachers have sought to ensure the coronavirus lockdown affects their pupils' development as little as possible.
While some children appear to have managed the transition relatively seamlessly, others are searching for motivation after exams were cancelled and it remains unclear when face-to-face classes will resume for all.
"Home-schooling a child is not easy but keeping a tight schedule works wonders for us," says Faith Mkhonto, from Southampton, whose seven-year-old son, Kayden, has been set assessments from textbooks by his primary schoolteachers.
"We both signed a contract to commit him to doing his work at a certain time each day. I let him do his studies by himself and then we go through it together."
She has been furloughed from her job as a retail store manager and is devoting her time to Kayden's schooling – paying him 50p a day if he completes all his work. "It's now that you really appreciate the teachers," she admits.
"Its not easy, teaching. I was unable to correctly explain a complicated maths problem so we emailed his teacher for help and he called soon after, and Kayden completely understood."
Joe Parrot, 13, who lives in Stockport, has also been assigned independent study from books, provided with daily online quizzes and sent informative slideshows in the absence of digital classes at his school. Unfortunately, he is in need of greater face-to-face help for the subjects he already finds difficult.
"I'm very interested in history and geography so teaching myself those has been great," he says. "But I don't like maths and teaching myself that has been awful. I procrastinate a lot and I need encouragement in person."
Particularly with Spanish, he says, self-study has been testing. "I'm used to a teacher saying the words so I can hear the pronunciation but we just have our booklet."
For year 12 student Basma Sayed (not her real name), 16, in Redbridge, east London, the lack of clarity over when she and her peers will return to school has been demotivating.
"I have watched Netflix when I could have been working," she says of the Easter holidays. "All the days are blurring into one."
Her teachers have been giving live classes online for her A-level subjects – maths, history and economics – and have set even more work than usual to keep everyone busy. But she has struggled to complete much of it despite wanting to go to university after sixth-form to study economics.
Secondary school English teacher Rosie Bircham, from Aberdeenshire, is also finding that inspiring her older pupils is her biggest challenge, while the younger students are more eager to learn.
"Remote teaching is going great," she says. "Google Classroom allows you to look at their work as they go, as if you are looking over their shoulder in the classroom.
"I'm getting over half of every junior class regularly submitting creative writing work to me, which is better than usual. They're really keen, I think they must be bored."
However, many of her 15- and 16-year-old students' interest in school has evaporated after exams were cancelled for the first time in Scottish history.
"Everyone was both weirdly elated and horribly disappointed and I think they've carried on that mood," she says.
"They're asking me, 'Why have you set us work, what's the point?'. Even those who are doing English next year for A-level just don't seem to care."
But Bircham is mindful that there are multiple barriers preventing some children from effectively studying at home, from food insecurity to a lack of equipment.
"We've had emails from kids who only have one laptop in their house and need to share it with their siblings and parents," she adds.
While her school is providing online classes, just like Sayed's, parents elsewhere are incredulous that they have not yet commenced more than a month after the education secretary, Gavin Williamson, announced that all schools would close to the majority of students.
"It's extremely challenging trying to keep a teenager motivated with schoolwork whilst simultaneously holding down a demanding full-time job," says Jo Jarvis, an account manager from Leeds whose 13-year-old son, Evan, has been assigned lots of English work but little maths.
"So far his assignments have been a mishmash of tasks, quizzes and articles across multiple sites with very little structure, and with some inconsistency across subjects."
After a chaotic start to home-schooling in places, schools are becoming more organised and have introduced new timetables. But challenges remain.
"We simply were not able to facilitate home-learning in the time we had," says Rob Ward, a secondary schoolteacher from Yorkshire. "Then, there were a series of botched app launches at our school prior to the holidays."
However, he is anxious not to criticise his school at a difficult time, made worse by the haste of the decision by the government which on Sunday supported the launch of the Oak National Academy, which offers some video lessons and learning resources to help mitigate vast differences in the offerings for pupils.
But ultimately the role of mothers, fathers and carers is key, Ward adds: "Sadly, whilst some parents will push their kids to learn, others won't have the time, skills or the inclination to do so."
This article was amended on 19 May 2020 to remove some personal information.