Is it unusual for a PM to skip Cobra meetings?
Boris Johnson missed five on coronavirus, but a PM's presence is by no means required
It was David Cameron who expanded the Cobra emergency planning system when he was prime minister, telling officials he wanted to be "one step ahead" of crisis events. His successor, Theresa May, was reluctant use it at first because she disliked a structure that had been used to assert authority over the Home Office she once ran.
The charge against Boris Johnson is that he did not want to turn up at all, skipping five Cobra meetings that discussed coronavirus in January and February and only chairing his first on 3 March, several weeks after the scale of the crisis had become apparent.
Situated in the basement of the Cabinet Office, not far from Churchill's war rooms, the Cobra suite of meeting rooms is the closest thing to a White House situation room that Whitehall has. Holding a Cobra meeting in front of the bank of screens conveys urgent action like nothing else in British politics.
Civil servants caution that Cobra is not necessarily at the heart of how British government should be run. It was designed – after Britain watched West Germany's hapless response to the 1972 Munich hostage crisis – to give a cross-government focus on an emergency incident, a terror attack or a mass-casualty disaster. Officials say it is not part of the normal Whitehall machine.
Some of its meetings, which tend to be hardly reported, are attended only by civil servants. Others are chaired by departmental ministers – Amber Rudd, when home secretary, chaired a Cobra meeting during the Skripal crisis, for instance. The presence of the prime minister is by no means necessary, although in each case the decision to hold a lower-level meeting should have been signed off by No 10.
In recent days the UK has seen a sudden sharp increase in Covid-19 infection numbers, leading to fears that a second wave of cases is beginning.
Epidemics of infectious diseases behave in different ways but the1918 influenza pandemicthat killed more than 50 million people is regarded as a key example of a pandemic that occurred in multiple waves, with the latter more severe than the first. It has been replicated – albeit more mildly – in subsequent flu pandemics. Until now that had been what was expected from Covid-19.
How and why multiple-wave outbreaks occur, and how subsequent waves of infection can be prevented, has become a staple of epidemiological modelling studies and pandemic preparation, which have looked at everything from social behaviour and health policy to vaccination and the buildup of community immunity, also known as herd immunity.
This is being watched very carefully. Without a vaccine, and with no widespread immunity to the new disease, one alarm is being sounded by the experience of Singapore, which has seen a suddenresurgence in infectionsdespite being lauded for its early handling of the outbreak.
Although Singapore instituted a strong contact tracing system for its general population, the disease re-emerged incramped dormitory accommodationused by thousands of foreign workers with inadequate hygiene facilities and shared canteens.
Singapore's experience, although very specific, has demonstrated the ability of the disease to come back strongly in places where people are in close proximity and its ability to exploit any weakness in public health regimes set up to counter it.
In June 2020, Beijing suffered from a new cluster of coronavirus cases which caused authorities to re-implement restrictions that China had previously been able to lift. In the UK, the city of Leicester was unable to come out of lockdown because of the development of a new spike of coronavirus cases. Clusters also emerged in Melbourne, requiring a re-imposition of lockdown conditions.
Conventional wisdom among scientists suggests second waves of resistant infections occur after the capacity for treatment and isolation becomes exhausted. In this case the concern is that the social and political consensus supporting lockdowns is being overtaken by public frustration and the urgent need to reopen economies.
However Linda Bauld, professor of public health at the University of Edinburgh, says "'Second wave' isn't a term that we would use at the current time, as the virus hasn't gone away, it's in our population, it has spread to 188 countries so far, and what we are seeing now is essentially localised spikes or a localised return of a large number of cases."
The overall threat declines when susceptibility of the population to the disease falls below a certain threshold or when widespread vaccination becomes available.
In general terms the ratio of susceptible and immune individuals in a population at the end of one wave determines the potential magnitude of a subsequent wave. The worry is that witha vaccine still many months away, and the real rate of infection only being guessed at, populations worldwide remain highly vulnerable to both resurgence and subsequent waves.
Peter Beaumont,Emma Graham-Harrison <i>and</i> Martin Belam
The system is designed to be resilient, so in theory it does not matter who chairs it: the brief is so detailed for whoever takes the meeting that they can lead the ministers and officials present "however stressed they are". As the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, said: "It is perfectly normal for the prime minister to delegate to the health secretary, or whoever the relevant secretary of state is, to chair Cobra. This is a normal, proper course of government."
But as Gordon Brown's former press aide Damian McBride pointed out over the weekend, during a foot and mouth crisis in 2007, Brown "didn't just attend every Cobra meeting, he chaired them all". That may have said a lot about Brown's approach to running government, to the point where he micromanaged detail, but it also showed a prime minister ready to engage with the issue at hand.
Chairing a Cobra meeting is a prime minister's choice, former officials say, and it is one way of highlighting the need for an early cross-government focus on a crisis such as coronavirus. Instead the government has repeatedly looked like it is behind the curve, as shown by the desperate attempts to ramp up testing, the calls for ventilator manufacturers to come forward, and the struggles to ensure there is enough protective equipment for NHS staff.