PPE shortages app receives hundreds of reports in first fortnight
More than 1,500 doctors have signed up to use app and 1,095 have reported problems
Hundreds of doctors have reported having to go without masks, eye protection and gowns in the last week, according to data seen by the Guardian.
Doctors short of protective kit include those carrying out high-risk "aerosol-generating procedures" with coronavirus patients.
The findings are drawn from research by the Doctors' Association UK, which has launched an app allowing doctors to report shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) in their workplace.
Since it was launched a fortnight ago, 1,598 doctors have signed up from 257 NHS trusts and practices, and 1,095 have reported problems.
The Guardian has recorded 81 deaths of healthcare workers reported in the news, but the true figure is likely to be higher. On Monday, Nursing Notes, a platform run by nurses for others in the profession, said it was aware of 100 deaths of NHS staff and social care workers.
The figures on PPE shortages do not necessarily imply that the same proportion of doctors as a whole are experiencing problems, since those facing an issue may be more likely to make a report.
Of the doctors reporting problems via the app, 766 said they had no access to the higher-grade FFP3 masks. Some 416 doctors without access to these masks were involved in aerosol-generating procedures such as suctioning Covid-19 patients in ICUs.
Gowns have been a particular problem, with 821 doctors reporting not being able to access one. For aerosol-generating procedures the number was 514.
While the gown and mask situation has deteriorated since the system was launched on 2 April, the availability of eye protection has improved slightly, with 416 doctors reporting no access to eye protection, including 252 doctors involved with aerosol-generating procedures.
Doctors are able to provide comments when they submit their data via the app. One said: "We're running short of gowns, visors and masks and we have been asked to reuse single use masks and visors unless visibly contaminated with blood or vomit."
Another said: "I was given a patient gown with plastic sleeves taped on to wear whilst performing a tracheostomy."
On Monday, Martin Barkley, the chief executive of the Mid Yorkshire hospitals NHS trust, said his staff had bought 6,000 sets of coveralls owing to very low stocks of long-sleeved gowns.
"The trust, along with many other trusts across the country, has very low stocks of the long-sleeved gowns required for use when staff are working in wards or departments where higher-risk procedures (ie aerosol-generating procedures) are carried out," he said.
"We fully recognise these coveralls are not ideal: they are more uncomfortable for staff and are more laborious to take on and off. However, our first priority is to keep our staff safe, and these coveralls will do so in the absence of certainty about the next delivery of long-sleeved gowns."
Doctors and others are setting up new organisations to try to source desperately needed PPE. Jasmine Ho, of MedSupplyDrive UK, which appeals for unused medical supplies from places such as research laboratories and redirects them to the NHS frontline, said: "We need contingency plans during this pandemic to ensure that we are suitably prepared for inevitable global PPE shortages."
She said some forms of PPE could be safely decontaminated using hydrogen peroxide vapour and reused, and one British company had designed technology to do this but had no licence to use the technology in the UK.
Instead the company had exported its decontamination techniques to the US having been granted a licence by the Food and Drug Administration.
Megan Phillips, a partner at Bhatt Murphy, is helping to source PPE and get it to frontline NHS workers via another organisation, Scrub and Face Protection Hub. "We are trying to coordinate the many efforts to help meet the needs of healthcare staff on the frontline. The present situation is deeply concerning," she said.
Dr Jenny Vaughan, of the Doctors Association, said: "We are concerned about the real disconnect between the government and the daily experiences of frontline staff who have been reporting their PPE status in droves via our NHSppe.com. Doctors are risking their lives on the frontline and deserve nothing less than the correct levels of PPE.
"A more sustainable solution will need to be found in the coming weeks and months to ensure a constant supply of PPE. The science behind any decontamination must be robust in order to keep frontline staff safe. Any evidence based decontamination process chosen should not and cannot offer inferior protection to frontline staff or cause degradation of equipment."
The Department of Health and Social Care has been approached for comment.