BAME Covid-19 deaths demand a broader inquiry
Your article (Failure to publish data on BAME deaths could put more lives at risk, MPs warn, 16 April) reports on a government inquiry into the disproportionate impact of Covid-19 on black and minority ethnic communities. The article draws attention to what data, if any, will be published. Although important, if this is the only focus of the inquiry, it will distract attention from the real issues.
While we have been alarmed by the emerging picture, we have not been surprised. We published an analysis shortly after the start of lockdown, which noted that while the majority of BAME communities were comparatively younger, the impact of discrimination (higher rates of poverty, overcrowding and poorer access to healthcare) increased the risk of the impact of Covid-19. We also highlighted the higher risk faced by healthcare workers from these communities. But what has been shocking – and should be the focus of any inquiry – is the lack of action to address the greater risks identified by us and others.
The limited focus of the inquiry, combined with news that it is to be conducted by the very organisations that should have been leading action to address disproportionality, does not fill us with confidence. We fear this will end up being an exercise in obfuscation rather than action.Jabeer ButtChief executive, Race Equality Foundation
As a GP working in a large BAME community, I am concerned by the unsupported assumption that low levels of vitamin D in BAME communities is contributing to the disproportionately high numbers affected by Covid-19.
Dr Colin Bannon's letter (15 April) fails to cite a single source of evidence. I'm in support of encouraging all communities to take vitamin D supplements when needed, but without measured vitamin D levels in those admitted to hospital with Covid-19, his assumption is misleading. Without evidential support, Dr Bannon's conjecture distracts from the overriding issue of health inequality, a topic that many politicians and health authorities would rather not address.
In the light of this pandemic, health inequality needs to be investigated. Public Health England must release data on ethnicity and Covid-19 infection rates immediately. The proposed review is only beneficial if the government instructs the National Institute for Health Research, which funds research into healthcare matters, to make an urgent call for research into why BAME groups are disproportionately affected.Dr Grace OkoliGP, Lambeth; clinical lecturer at Barts and The London medical school
The tragic deaths of BAME NHS staff cannot go on unchecked. As a second-generation BAME consultant, I know only too well of my genetic predisposition to cardiovascular disease. I rarely find any BAME doctor of my age or older who is not being treated for high blood pressure. But that's not all. Some years ago, I found myself on the point of virtual collapse and diagnosed with a severe vitamin D deficiency. This vitamin is key to the body's immunity, including to chest infections, and is also likely to be lower in BAME populations.
With the combination of a Covid-exposed environment, compounded by high levels of stress and long working hours, it is not surprising that Covid-19 has taken its toll on BAME doctors. Apart from looking after our own health, we also need to be aware that Covid-19 infection is less likely to be mild than in other ethnicities. It is a salutary tale that may call for extra vigilance.Dr Tony RaoBeckenham, Kent
Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com
Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Do you have a photo you'd like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we'll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition
