I am an eye surgeon but could soon be your doctor in the ICU. I'm terrified
I am fearful for the future, uncertain for how my skills will hold up when put to test
I am an ophthalmologist. I am the doctor you see for your cataract surgery, the doctor your grandmother sees to have her age-related macular degeneration checked, the one who prescribed the bedtime drops to slow down your grandfather's glaucoma. In the next few weeks I will be the doctor your father sees for his stroke, the doctor who treats your grandmother's heart failure, the doctor you see in A&amp;E to treat your asthma. Potentially the doctor you meet in intensive care.
The landscape of medicine has changed in only a few weeks. Ophthalmology has one of the largest outpatient services. We see hundreds of patients per week for surgery or in clinic to fix common eye complaints. We have now cancelled all routine outpatient activity and kept only urgent care.
As we close the doors to our outpatient services, we wonder as ophthalmologists what our purpose will now be. Yes, the public think NHS workers are heroes, but do we see ourselves as soldiers ready to fight this new war? For me, the answer is no. If you were to look back at my old school reports, none of them would say "courageous warrior". More likely I was described as a studious introvert with a penchant for learning – "struggles with PE due to asthma" was a recurring remark. Essentially I am an academic, a microsurgeon. I am definitely not a soldier.
As the days stutter on and the ocular emergencies become fewer and fewer, it is clear we will be redeployed to manage general medical emergencies sooner rather than later.
Already many of our colleagues in other departments have been geared up and deployed on the frontline. Our radiologists are no longer sitting in their dark rooms finding meaning from complex shades of grey; they are now managing non-invasive ventilators, grappling with personal protective equipment and diagnosing respiratory failure.
As ophthalmologists, our current mission is to minimise the risk of vision loss due to cancelled operations and appointments. Our clinic rooms are now the hub from where we conduct telephone consults and video-link assessments.
Never before could I have imagined living in this world where the unknowns far outweigh what we know. I am fearful of the future, uncertain of how our skills will hold up when put to test, and utterly lost in this limbo where we wait to find out what will happen tomorrow.
What is clear is the incredible ability the NHS has to mobilise a highly skilled workforce with immediate effect. New weekly rotas have been issued through meetings running until past midnight, and simulation skills courses have materialised in days, providing us with an all too real insight into what lies ahead.
Every morning we convene to find out whether we are going to be deployed to see acute emergencies. So far my name has not been called and yet the feeling of relief sliced with guilt is overwhelming. Guilt that I could be doing more, and relief that I still have time to up-skill and prepare for my future role.
For now, I will continue with my urgent eye clinic interspersed with virtual refresher courses on cardiopulmonary resuscitation, a skill I have not had to use in more than seven years. It's a small comfort that I can recall the actions in this safe environment. How we will fare when the recipient is no longer a mannequin but someone's loved one will be the true test.
If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series about experiences in healthcare during the coronavirus outbreak, get in touch by emailing sarah.johnson@theguardian.com
This article was amended on 20 April 2020 to correct a fair/fare homophone in the final sentence.