Welcome to April's Observer Food Monthly
With the country in lockdown, we bring you great store-cupboard recipes, a guide to wines that soothe, and Jay Rayner asks how UK restaurants will cope
My "larder" is a converted broom cupboard under the stairs. Larder is a rather grand word for it, but that is what we call this tiny space whose walls are lined with narrow shelves and is home to everything from pappardelle to prosecco. Not exactly a vast squirrel store, but just large enough to get by when you are told not to leave the house for three weeks. Except, of course, I have, but only to stand in appropriately distanced lines at the fishmonger or the deli or the cheese shop. Vegetables have been brought to the door by the farms that usually service restaurants and are now happy to sell their harvest to anyone quick enough to order it online.
Truth told, what I had assumed was a well-stocked food store was, on closer inspection, mostly carbs. I'm not sure if there is a type of lentil that isn't preserved in one of my glass Kilners, or indeed any variety of rice. There were three sizes of couscous, two of polenta and more seeds than a branch of Whole Foods.
Sadly, none of these really form a meal on their own, and my little store was lacking in anything to put with them. It was extremely bad planning on my part not to have a few tins of tomatoes or even a bottle of oyster sauce; there was tamarind paste and capers, rice flour and jaggery, but what I really needed was some fat green olives to whizz to a paste, or even a jar of pesto to lubricate the frustratingly small amounts of pasta in each packet.
In this month's OFM, we ask some of our favourite cooks what to do with the store cupboard ingredients they never got round to using. The tinned peaches, dried beans and jars of tahini that sit in the cupboard for ever and a day whose presence we are now welcoming. Jay Rayner examines how restaurants are coping, we have a collection of three-ingredient recipes from five great cooks, a guide to lockdown drinking from David Williams, and some suggestions for what to watch while we are trapped indoors.