London police officer dies after contracting coronavirus
BTP detective John Coker, 53, described as 'kind and thoughtful', fell ill on 22 March
We would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died from Covid-19. You can get in touch by filling in the form below, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your contributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss further.
BTP detective John Coker, 53, described as 'kind and thoughtful', fell ill on 22 March
A British Transport Police officer has died after contracting Covid-19.
DC John Coker, 53, was pronounced dead on Friday after falling ill with coronavirus symptoms on 22 March.
He was admitted to hospital and transferred to intensive care as his condition worsened but he could not be saved despite the efforts of medics.
Coker had served in the BTP for more than a decade and was based at Euston, London.
Chief constable Paul Crowther said he was "much loved and respected by all those he worked with".
He said: "His colleagues remember a man who was charismatic, kind and thoughtful and took everything in his stride. He will be greatly missed by all in the force.
"My thoughts are with John's family, for whom the last three weeks have been incredibly difficult and who will be struggling to deal with this most distressing outcome."
Coker is survived by his wife and their three children.
The National Police Chief's Council said it was "saddened" to hear of the detective's death. "The thoughts of all police chiefs will be with his family, friends and colleagues at this difficult time," it added.
-tributes-and-memories
Coker's death comes weeks after that of Greater Manchester police (GMP) worker Marcia Pryce and an unnamed policeman from Dorset.
Pryce, who died on 2 April, had worked for the GMP for more than 30 years, most recently in its force intelligence bureau.
"Marcia was a powerhouse, a positive influence in my life and the lives of the many people she knew and loved," said her sister Amira Asantewa.
"Particularly in her long career with GMP, she touched the lives of so many friends and colleagues over the years and made relationships that lasted a life time. She will always be remembered for her strong work ethic and powerful personality."
Earlier this month, Dorset police also paid tribute to one of its officers who died on 30 March while self-isolating at home.
Chief constable James Vaughan said the 56-year-old had been unwell since Christmas with a chest infection.
"He had been off sick since Thursday 19 March and went into self-isolation following Covid-19 guidance from the NHS after displaying symptoms," he added. "It is not yet confirmed if the death is Covid-19-related and I would strongly emphasise that it is too early to speculate on the circumstances surrounding his death."
The news of Coker's death comes less than 24 hours after the health secretary, Matt Hancock, announced that the number of people in the UK eligible to be tested for Covid-19 had been expanded to include the police, fire service and judiciary, among others.