UK woman dies from coronavirus eight days after giving birth
Death of 37-year-old diabetic prompts calls for greater protection of pregnant women
A 37-year-old woman has died of Covid-19 eight days after giving birth, sparking calls for the government to take further measures to protect "terrified" pregnant women across the UK.
Salina Shaw, who was diabetic, tested positive for Covid-19 and gave birth to a daughter on 4 April but died on Easter Sunday. Writing on Facebook, her cousin said she was "a force to be reckoned with, a powerful single mum, with fire in her belly and determination".
Shaw had posted a scan of her baby, her third child, on Facebook on 18 March, writing: "We love u and we can't wait to meet u 6 weeks to go." Replying to the comment of a friend, she added: "Feeling anxious bringing a child into this mess at the moment."
The childminder and business owner from Southend in Essex was vegan, healthy and had followed social distancing guidelines, her partner, Abdul Bangura, told the Sun.
Shaw's family have launched a fundraiser for her children.
The news comes after the death of Mary Agyeiwaa Agyapong, a nurse who worked on a general ward at Luton and Dunstable university hospital for five years. The 28-year-old, who was described as a "fabulous nurse", gave birth to her daughter Mary days after being taken into hospital on 7 April but died on Easter Sunday.
The hospital said her baby was doing well, while it is understood that her husband, Ernest Boateng, is in self-isolation. It is not known if the child has contracted Covid-19.
Organisations supporting pregnant women said the deaths had sent shockwaves through the half a million pregnant women in the UK and accused the government of failing to give clear guidance to protect expectant mothers.
"It's so very sad to lose another mother to this virus," said Rosalind Bragg, the chief executive of Maternity Action. "We know from our advice lines that pregnant women are very anxious about the risk of infection – and these recent tragedies have added to their distress."
Joeli Brearley, the CEO of Pregnant Then Screwed (PTS), said the number of women contacting the organisation had "gone through the roof".
"Many people contacting us are absolutely terrified about contracting this virus," she said. "Women already feel on edge and vulnerable when pregnant, particularly if they have had miscarriages or have conceived through IVF, and this is just adding layers of anxiety."
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) said there were already legal protections for women that had to be followed during the pandemic.
A spokesperson said: "Our guidance is in the process of being updated to state that pregnant women should not be required to continue working if this is not supported by a risk assessment, and that suitable alternative work should be offered."
The Guardian previously revealed that pregnant women have reported being laid off during the pandemic while male co-workers are kept on, and have been forced to take unpaid leave or sick leave if they want to remain at home. Pregnant healthcare workers have spoken about being bullied into working when they feel unsafe, some in direct contact with patients.
"We have asked for clear government guidance on health and safety protections for pregnant women, without result," said Bragg. "We know that many pregnant women are being put at risk by unsafe working conditions or forced on to unpaid or badly paid leave – this should not be happening."
A spokesperson for the Department of Health and Social Care pointed the Guardian to government guidance, which states that pregnant women are in the group considered "at increased risk of severe illness from coronavirus" and who should be "particularly stringent in following social distancing measures".