People who need end-of-life care shouldn't have to die alone because of coronavirus
My mother received excellent palliative care, but specialists worry that Covid-19 is now limiting people's choices
"I put on my mask, goggles, apron and gloves and enter his room. He looks scared. I say his name and tell him what we are doing. All he says is, 'Oh Jesus' over and over. I have no idea if he has understood anything I have said."
Jan Bolton, a Macmillan coordinator of social care at Northampton general hospital, is describing telling a patient he will be transferred to a hospice for end-of-life care. With pandemic restrictions on visitors, Bolton is having to deliver bad news to patients without their loved ones being present. She is one of several end-of-life care specialists I've spoken to over the past few days.
The health and social care secretary, Matt Hancock, is right to relax the restrictions on care homes so that relatives can say goodbye. But he needs to go further to ensure the right procedures and resources are in place so no one need die alone.
Coronavirus has brought more attention to how patients' lives are ending. NHS England acknowledges that palliative care, which focuses on enhancing the quality of life for dying people and those close to them, has a crucial role.
But Covid-19 is also upending many of the defining approaches of end-of-life care by taking away choices, making dying and bereavement more distressing for patients, relatives and care professionals.
As I found out in 1992 when my mother was cared for by staff from St Christopher's Hospice in south London, in palliative care a person is much more than their diagnosis. Our nurse from the hospice gave us confidence at a time when we felt afraid. And my mum was able to die at home, without pain, with her sister and my cousins, who had flown over from Australia.
My mother's death sparked my academic research into end-of-life care, particularly for migrants. But access to hospice and palliative care in the UK has always been limited and this has been exacerbated by the present crisis.
Care professionals are working at the heart of an inescapable double-bind, points out Professor Christina Faull, a consultant in palliative medicine at Leicester's Loros hospice. They must follow infection control rules, even though they know that some of the enforced restrictions will cause emotional harm to patients and their families.
In palliative care, pain is recognised not just as physical, but also spiritual, social and psychological. As we have been seeing, the physical ravages of Covid-19 are accompanied by many types of distress and loss.
It is the social distancing measures that feel especially cruel. It's been gut-wrenching to see relatives waving through care home windows because visitors are no longer allowed, and to hear about families unable to attend funerals.
Hospitals and hospices are restricting visits to one person. And although they are trying to ensure relatives are there at the time of death, it is often difficult to gauge how imminent that might be. One visitor may come several times, gowning up each time in personal protective equipment – if  it is available.
Wendy Ashton, co-chair of the association of palliative care social workers, and family support team lead at Eden Valley Hospice, says it is heartbreaking to see patients die on their own, or with only one person there. It is equally hard to see that visitor alone, with no support, after the death of their loved one.
Dying alone can be particularly difficult for those from minority ethnic communities because of language differences and anxieties that religious death rituals will not be followed. One bilingual advocate, working in an area with a large Pakistani muslim community, told me that several of his patients are choosing to stay at home rather than being cut off from their families.
The huge surge of illness and death has also meant more staff are delivering end-of life care without specialist training. It is understandable, that professionals are anxious about this new intimacy with dying, says Paul Paes, a consultant in palliative medicine and director of community services at Northumbria healthcare NHS foundation trust. It's important for all staff to recognise that conversations about end of life care are tough. Being able to share worries and support one another is important for families and clinical teams alike.
Around the country, teams are doing what they can. Lincolnshire hospitals, for instance, have set up. "wobble rooms" for staff to have some respite. And a group of clinicians is addressing the issue by collating guidance and resources for Health Education England, to share palliative care knowledge quickly.
Paes points out that after the immediate crisis is over, bereaved families and health professionals will have to live with the decisions that are being made today. It is crucial for staff to retain their humanity, treat people as individuals and make decisions that respect their values.
All these years later, I still remember my mum's death. I feel grateful that we had that time together. But I shouldn't have to feel lucky. Access to palliative care shouldn't depend on your postcode – and that applies now, more than ever.
Yasmin Gunaratnam is a reader in sociology at Goldsmith's College, University of London. She is the author of Death and the Migrant