13,000 absent from UK armed forces due to coronavirus
9.1% of military away, mostly self-isolating, looking after family or working from home
Thirteen thousand members of the armed forces are absent from duty because of coronavirus, largely because they are self-isolating, looking after other family members or otherwise having to work from home.
The figure amounts to 9.1% of the military, although the Ministry of Defence insisted that support for the NHS in the UK and British commitments overseas was unaffected, partly because the actual infection rate remains low.
It is understood that fewer than 100 service personnel have tested positive for coronavirus, the first time for three weeks the department has given any indication of how far the disease is affecting the armed forces. Previously it said there were fewer than 10 cases.
Labour has called for the government to publish data on how many service personnel have been tested, amid concerns that the British armed forces could fall victim to an outbreak of the type that has affected the US and French navies.
Responding to the latest figures, John Healey, the shadow defence secretary, said: "These concerning figures make Labour's case for greater protections and more testing of forces personnel even stronger. Our armed forces keep us safe. It is vital we do the same for them."
Nearly 600 sailors serving onboard the USS Theodore Roosevelt aircraft carrier tested positive for coronavirus, and one died, after an outbreak got out of control in the confines of the warship.
More than 600 cases emerged on the French aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle. Britain's Queen Elizabeth aircraft carrier is due to take part in an sea training exercise off the coast of the UK later this month, with a crew of around 600 onboard.
The MoD has been reluctant to release statistics about how many armed forces personnel have been tested or how many forces personnel are ill or absent from duty, at a time when the government as a whole is under pressure over whether it is able to test NHS and social care staff.
Forces personnel have voiced concern about the lack of testing in suspected cases, while soldiers placed on standby have complained they are being housed in barracks conditions, where social distancing is not always practised, particularly during training.
Gen Sir Nick Carter, the chief of the defence staff, said that around 3,000 forces personnel were helping to carry out a number of frontline tasks in the UK, including 200 working in the ambulance services, as well as assisting the emergency delivery of protective equipment, oxygen and ventilators for hospitals.
Engineers and planners were increasingly becoming involved in the desperate efforts to expand the UK's coronavirus testing capability. Carter said that armed forces were looking at developing prototype "pop-ups, like mobile libraries" to provide testing services to care homes and remote communities.
"The military is involved in trying to construct that and create prototypes that could be let out to industry in short order," Carter said. Defence scientists at the Porton Down lab in Wiltshire were also "providing valuable help to testing and the way testing will be conducted in the future", the forces chief said.
The MoD has tried to adopt a relatively low profile during the coronavirus crisis, and where it has been deployed it has largely sought to do so away from the public eye. Insiders insist that they do not expect soldiers to be deployed to protect public order.
"Our role is very much in support of the heroic healthcare workers on the frontline," the general added.