Which Covid tier am I in? UK postcode tiers checker
Find out what the rules are for pubs, restaurants, worship and leisure in your area
Since 2 December, England has been under a modified system of tiered restrictions. There are three tiers, officially graded by "risk" but in fact also reflecting such considerations as the resilience of an area's NHS.
Even the least restrictive tier 1 maintains the rule that no more than six people should gather at once. The most restrictive tier 3 requires all pubs and restaurants to remain closed.
Meanwhile, Scotland has its own five-level tier system. Wales and Northern Ireland have national restrictions in place. Use our postcode search to find out what you can and can't do based on where you live.
The government says it considers the following five indicators in allocating local authorities to each tier: case detection rates in all age groups; case detection rates in the over-60s; the rate at which cases are rising or falling; the number of positive cases detected as a percentage of tests taken, known as positivity rate; and pressure on the NHS.
So even if a local authority has a relatively low case detection rate, it may be allocated to a higher tier if cases are high among the more vulnerable 60-plus group, or if its local hospitals are facing high occupancy – for instance if the hospitals themselves are in a worse-hit area.
On Wednesday 16 December, London and parts of Essex and Hertfordshire were moved into tier three in response to rising case rates.
On Saturday 19 December, large areas of the east and south-east - including Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Berkshire, Peterborough, Hertfordshire and Surrey – are set to also be placed into tier three. Bristol and North Somerset will move down to tier two, while Herefordshire will move down to tier one.
Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as well as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.