Tier 3 lockdown rules in England: latest Covid restrictions explained
What are you allowed to do in a tier 3 area, and what are the rules for Christmas?
As in all other tiers, non-essential shops can open, as can gyms, hairdressers and other personal care businesses. Places of worship can open and weddings are allowed within local restrictions.
Hospitality venues must close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home.
Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, can continue in all tiers, as can amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators cannot watch sport in tier 3.
People must not meet socially indoors or in most outdoor places with anybody they do not live with, or who is not in their support bubble; this includes in any private garden or at most outdoor venues. At other outdoor spaces such as parks or beaches people must not socialise in groups of more than six.
Everyone who can work from home should do so.
You can travel within your area for work, education and purposes of providing care or medical assistance, but should avoid travelling outside your area and reduce the number of journeys you make wherever possible.
If you live in a tier 3 area, you must continue to follow tier 3 rules when you travel to a tier 1 or tier 2 area.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be found here.
An original plan to allow households to mix for a limited time across all four UK nations has been scrapped as cases have continued to rise. In England, three households in tiers 1-3 can mix on 25 December only, while in tier 4 there will be no Christmas relaxation. Wales has also tightened its rules to allow two households to mix only on Christmas Day, while in Scotland the bubble should not include more than eight people aged over 12. People in Scotland have also been advised not to meet up with others in their Christmas bubble for more than a day. More details on the Christmas rules can be found here.
Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.