Rupert Murdoch receives dose of Covid vaccine in UK
Exclusive: 89-year-old News Corp boss gives thanks to key workers, NHS staff and scientists
Rupert Murdoch has become the latest public figure to have the coronavirus vaccine, visiting his local GP's surgery late on Wednesday to receive his first dose.
A convoy of Range Rovers delivered the 89-year-old billionaire to a dedicated vaccine centre in Henley, Oxfordshire, where normal hours are understood to have been extended at the last minute. An email was sent out saying: "Just a reminder – we have been advised 'no media coverage' due to security issues. Please note that photography and video are strictly forbidden."
A statement issued on behalf of Murdoch, the executive chairman of News Corp, said he "had the vaccine at his local GP's surgery after he received a call saying he was eligible".
Murdoch urged people to get the vaccine, saying: "I would like to thank the keyworkers and the NHS staff who have worked so hard throughout the pandemic, and the amazing scientists who have made this vaccine possible. I strongly encourage people around the world to get the vaccine as it becomes available."
People aged over 80 are in the second tier of priority groups for the vaccine, along with frontline health and social care workers. The first priority were residents in care homes and their carers.
Murdoch, who is Australian-born and a US citizen, has been isolating at his home near Henley for much of the year with his wife, Jerry Hall Murdoch.
While Murdoch's endorsement of the jab echoes his British publications' strong support of vaccination programmes as the best way out of the coronavirus crisis, there have been different views in some corners of his media empire.
Tucker Carlson, the rightwing Fox News host, highlighted a rare "bad vaccine reaction" on his programme on Thursday and suggested people should respond "nervously" to the vaccine's "marketing campaign". He claimed to be "strongly supportive" of vaccines but complained: "It feels false because it is. It's too slick."
Earlier this year, at around the same time that a planned birthday party for Murdoch was reported to have been called off out of concern for his health, hosts on Fox described those who were concerned about the crisis as "panic pushers" who were propagating "mass hysteria".
Other public figures in the UK to have received the vaccine recently include Sir Ian McKellen, who said he felt "euphoric" and noted: "Anyone who has lived as long as I have is alive because they have had previous vaccinations."
Prue Leith and Lionel Blair have also been given the vaccine, as has Michael Whitehall, Jack Whitehall's father.