Tier 2 lockdown rules in England: latest Covid restrictions explained
What are you allowed to do in a tier 2 area, and what are the rules for Christmas?
As in all other tiers, non-essential shops can open, as can gyms, hairdressers and other personal care businesses. Places of worship can open and weddings are allowed within local restrictions.
Hospitality venues can stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – but only those that serve substantial meals can operate, while other pubs and bars have to close.
Social mixing outside of households or support bubbles is not allowed indoors. The rule of six applies outdoors.
Spectators are allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, can open, but must close at 11pm.
Everyone who can work from home should do so.
You can continue to travel to venues that are open, or for reasons such as work or education, but you should reduce the number of journeys you make wherever possible.
If you live in a tier 2 area, you must continue to follow tier 2 rules when you travel to a tier 1 area. However, avoid travel to or overnight stays in tier 3 areas other than where necessary.
The government does not recommend that you travel from tier 2 into a tier 3 area, for example, to do Christmas shopping.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be found here.
An original plan to allow households to mix for a limited time across all four UK nations has been scrapped as cases have continued to rise. In England, three households in tiers 1-3 can mix on 25 December only, while in tier 4 there will be no Christmas relaxation. Wales has also tightened its rules to allow two households to mix only on Christmas Day, while in Scotland the bubble should not include more than eight people aged over 12. People in Scotland have also been advised not to meet up with others in their Christmas bubble for more than a day. More details on the Christmas rules can be found here.
Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as best as possible. The most recent update will have been made at the date shown at the top of the article. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted below in line with Guardian editorial policy.