'One meal a day': how pandemic hit families before Unicef's aid
Parents react to Jacob Rees-Mogg's attack on UN agency for providing breakfasts for Southwark schools
Sharon Forde looks into the middle distance and winces. "Without these breakfast boxes, I would have had to pawn the TV; the last thing I've got left that's worth anything. But when that money was spent, I don't know what I would have done." Her eyes go hard. "I don't like to think about it."
Forde is one of the 84 parents at Hollydale primary school in Southwark, south London, whose children will now be able to eat breakfast over the Christmas holidays, thanks to a shock intervention by the UN agency Unicef UK.
It is the first time in its 70-year history that the aid charity, tasked with providing humanitarian aid to children worldwide, has launched a "domestic emergency response": pledging a grant of £25,000 to the community project School Food Matters to supply 18,000 nutritious breakfasts to 25 schools over the two-week Christmas holidays and February half-term.
"My children can have full bellies over Christmas now, which means I will have the money to eat properly myself too," says Forde. "During lockdown, I was surviving on one meal a day so that the kids could eat … there just isn't the money any more to buy food for us all and pay the rent too."
Forde and her two young children have never needed help before. "But the pandemic tipped me over the poverty line: losing 20% of my salary under furlough wasn't sustainable when rent stayed the same and my bills increased because we were at home all the time," she says.
Forde was outraged to hear about Jacob Rees-Mogg's attack on Unicef on Thursday when he said the charity's support for British children was a "scandal" and a "political stunt of the lowest order".
"It's a disgusting thing to say," she says. "I need this help because politicians like him have let us down.
"He talks about children starving in other countries but doesn't he realise there are children in this country who go hungry too? What world is he living in – because it's not mine."
Anna Kettley, a deputy executive director at Unicef, said that given the crisis unfolding on its doorstep, the aid agency had no choice but to break the mould.
"The Covid pandemic has created a crisis among children in the UK more urgent that any since the second world war," she said.
"We're one of the richest countries in the world. We should not be having to rely on food boxes and food aid at all, but it's really important we are there to protect the most vulnerable."
Terri-Ann Wellington, a cinema assistant and parent at the school, has also been forced over the poverty line by the pandemic.
"I buy orange juice for my children, dilute it to make it go further but find I still have to tell them not to drink too much because I can't afford to buy any more," she says.
"Where does the Great come from in Great Britain if parents like us – who have always worked – have to restrict their children from drinking anything except water?"
Reema Reid has been headteacher at Hollydale since 2013. About a quarter of her 200 families have always needed her help to feed their children, she says, but that figure has now risen to about 40%.
"We've worked hard to identify these new parents. But they're proud. They've worked all their lives and have just about got by.
"But when we sent out a text at 10am that we had breakfast boxes available, they were here at 10.10am, queuing up to collect them," she says.
"That was the moment when it clicked for me how many families the pandemic has pushed into poverty for the first time," she adds.
Reid points to a telling statistic: since the pandemic, there has been an 80% fall in the number of parents able to pay for school music lessons.
Even though the school dipped into its pockets and cut the cost of lessons by half – to £6 each – it was still too much for families' newly decimated finances.
Caroline Folly, co-chair of Hollydale's school governors, has been listening quietly. Now she turns to Reid and asks a crucial question. "What scares me is, what do we do when the breakfast boxes stop coming and the furlough scheme stops?"
Reid's first answer comes quickly: "You don't want to go there."
Then she pauses and answers more slowly. "I'm hopeful that politicians and citizens will step up. There's enough money in this country for everyone to have enough.
"If the government is really interested in children succeeding, then they will realise that it's crucial that it happens here and now."