Eggs Benedict and tattoos: what Melburnians are looking forward to when lockdown ends
Some are packing their next few weeks full of activities, while others just want a chance to decompress
After a long dark night, there always comes the dawn, and for many Melburnians that dawn is a good strong coffee.
That's certainly what retiree James Green missed the most. Visiting his local cafe is on the top of his list of things to do on Wednesday when hospitality venues in Melbourne are finally allowed to reopen.
"I just want to sit down and take that first sip," he said smiling.
For the last few months, Green has been frequenting a specific bench in Prahran Square to sip his takeaway latte and eat his cheese and avocado toastie, but he says it's just not the same.
"I only got the chance to have a coffee in the cafe once between the lockdowns, so this is going to be great."
Dreaming about the wonders of Wednesday has become a full-time hobby for most in Melbourne as they count down the minutes to midnight. Ellie Florence has her whole first night planned out.
"I cannot wait to go to a sweaty pub with ancient wooden floorboards, drink four pints, get in an argument with a stranger about politics, and then go home and go to bed," she said.
Others are excited to be free of their own cooking.
"After months of 'perfecting' homemade eggs Benedict I honestly can't wait to go to a cafe and have someone else make it for me, and throw my sourdough recipe out the window," said Andy from East Melbourne.
"I don't care how expensive it is, I just need someone else to make it for me, it's just not the same at home".
From Wednesday the four essential reasons to leave your home will be abolished, meaning those like Gwen Gilbert will be able to sit and watch the waves for hours.
"I'm going down to the beach so I can hear, see and smell it. I'm unable to walk along the sand now, but sitting there restores my soul," she said.
"I am an old age pensioner, a widow and all my children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren lived too far away to be able to visit. Thankfully that is changing soon and my daughter and I have already organised a get-together … it's been unbelievably lonely not seeing family and friends but I totally support the lockdown, anything to keep my family and friends safe."
After eight months of intermittent lockdowns, some homes in Melbourne are feeling a little smaller than they used to. The artist Glen Downey is desperate to get his equipment back in the studio where it belongs.
"My apartment is way too small to hold everything. My girlfriend is a tattoo artist and she is in there as well. Thankfully we get along well, but having our own space is pretty important to us," he said.
Some, like the writer Brodie Lancaster, are making up for lost time, packing their next few weeks full of activities.
"[I've] booked in a mani-pedi, haircut, massage, five pub bookings and two tattoos for the next month," she said.
"I'm most looking forward to going to Myer to get my Swatch [watches] repaired because I've felt naked in lockdown since two of them broke. Desperate to get hand-pulled oil seared noodles in Chinatown."
But for some, the real pleasure will be staying inside their own little bubble, but this time without the legal mandate.
"I'm a carer of an adult son with a disability and very high support needs. Overnight respite is back next Thursday, so that means a proper break for me and my other son," Annie from Preston said.
Deanne Carson, who runs an anti-family-violence community organisation is also looking forward to a chance to decompress.
"Sitting in my garden with my partner, reflecting on the emotional journey of supporting at-risk kids and families … through a pandemic," she said.
"[Just] allowing ourselves to exhale and release the tension of responsibility that came with 2020. I'm not ready to get into the world."