Muslim community leaders fear hate attacks after student at Islamic school tests positive
More than a hundred residents are being told to isolate after a school student attended classes at East Preston Islamic College and later tested positive
Muslim community leaders say they fear a "fresh wave of hatred" after an infectious student at an Islamic school has sparked fears of an outbreak in Melbourne's north-west.
Two schools closed and more than one hundred social housing residents have been told to isolate after a grade five boy who was meant to be quarantining attended classes at the East Preston Islamic College for several days before testing positive to Covid-19.
Residents across the city's northern suburbs have been told to monitor for symptoms as the Department of Health and Human Services tries to curb the potential for an outbreak of Covid-19 in vulnerable communities.
But Adel Salman, spokesperson for the Islamic Council of Victoria, said the community was also bracing for another round of racial attacks.
"What I've heard from the community so far is 'here we go again', with [people] attacking the Muslim community, and using it as an excuse to again spread hate and lies and misinformation," he said.
"We've just come out of a pretty horrific and sustained attack on the Muslim community," Salman said. "There is a risk, in fact, it's more than a risk, it's pretty likely that that is going to happen again."
During the early days of Melbourne's second wave, a large outbreak at the Islamic school Al-Taqwa college received considerable attention.
Premier Daniel Andrews addressed the Muslim community during his daily press conference.
"I would say to those faith leaders … this virus does not discriminate based on your postcode, where your mum and dad were born, the language you speak at home, the place where you go to pray or if you don't go to pray … This is not a function of faith, far from it. So nobody in the Islamic community should have that sense," he said.
"There are some people in different communities … that may feel a sense of shame or stigma that they have got a positive test. Nobody should feel that ever … If you're positive, you're doing your job. You are doing the right thing in coming forward and getting tested."
The schoolboy, along with four other Covid-19 cases confirmed in Victoria on Thursday, is linked to the same cluster in the northern suburbs. This number is a slight rise from Wednesday's three new cases, but still lower than the 14 day rolling average of 6.1.
Jeroen Weimar from the DHHS said he expects more positive cases to crop up.
"The college has taken positive steps to manage this situation and is working closely with us. It has been closed for deep cleaning."
East Preston Islamic College principal Ekrem Ozyurek has told media that the student was meant to be quarantining after one of their siblings tested positive for Covid-19 several weeks earlier, but there had been a misunderstanding and he had attended class on Monday and Tuesday of this week.
"We're not trying to find a fault in this one," Ozyurek told The Age.
"The best thing is to see what we can do from now on,"
Deputy chief health officer Allen Cheng said this mistake may have been due to confusion between the terms "isolation" referring to the time after a diagnosis, and "quarantine" referring to the time before the onset of symptoms where someone might be infected.
"What had probably happened in this case was that the people who had infection had been cleared and they had been out of isolation, but the people who hadn't had infections were still in quarantine and there was obviously some confusion between them," Cheng said.
But official releases from the DHHS about the Preston school case also appear to use the term "self-isolate" when referring to quarantine.
Cheng suggested that the department's policy from now would be for one case manager to manage a full family rather than different managers for individual members in order to help avoid confusion.
Andrews appeared to contest the idea that families were not being provided enough information.
"I'm not conceding the point that people were not told what they needed to be told. Often the assumption is they must have been told the wrong thing. No, families can make a choice."
Ozyurek said he was informed the child should have been in isolation when the health department contacted him on Tuesday inquiring about the boy's attendance.
The principal then made the decision to close the school as a precaution and the boy tested positive the following day. The department official ordered the campus to be closed and deep cleaned.
East Preston Islamic College has around 600 students from prep to Year 12.
Weimar said that 73 classmates and teachers considered to be close contacts had been identified and asked to quarantine with their families for 14 days – more than 400 people in total.
Contacts stretched across multiple suburbs including Dallas, Roxburgh Park, Broadmeadows, Preston and West Heidelberg, and a text message was sent on Wednesday alerting people who lived in or were visiting these areas to get tested if they were experiencing symptoms.
A spokesperson for the department confirmed in a statement that "additional cases linked to this outbreak have also been identified in a social housing block in Broadmeadows".
The department has now sent the block's 120 residents notices asking them to self-isolate for 48 hours and get tested for Covid-19, but Weimar said it was extremely likely that the virus was contained to the one apartment.
Infection control in social housing in Melbourne is a sensitive subject after the government was heavily criticised for their handling of the hard lockdown of nine social housing towers in July.
Dallas Brooks Primary School has also been closed for deep cleaning and contact tracing as a precaution after a close contact was identified there.
Andrews said despite the situation in Melbourne's northern suburbs he was feeling positive about the possibility of lifting some restrictions on Sunday, and flagged that there may be news on faith-based gatherings, such as church services.
But any easing will not come in time for the grand final weekend, with Victoria police stating they will be using drone technology to monitor public spaces and catch those breaching gathering limits.
Victoria Police Assistant Commissioner Luke Cornelius told Melbourne radio station 3AW that drones wouldn't be used to monitor private properties.
Further north, a diplomat aged in his seventies is the first coronavirus case in Canberra for more than 100 days.
ACT chief health officer Kerryn Coleman said the man returned from overseas on 9 October, flying into Sydney before travelling to Canberra in a private vehicle.
He has been quarantining since his return to the ACT.
NSW reported just one new locally acquired case of Covid-19, a close contact of a previously confirmed case in southwest Sydney, linked to the Liverpool private clinic cluster which now numbering 13.
