Restrictions are being eased for Melbourne and regional Victoria: the new Covid rules explained
From 19 October and again on 2 November, there are changes to restrictions on travel, activities and businesses. Here's what you need to know
The Victorian government has begun easing restrictions after more than 100 days of lockdown for Melbourne residents.
Here is what changes for people in Melbourne, and for people living in regional Victoria.
Fitted masks must still be worn at all times when outside the home.
From 19 October the following changes to restrictions are in place
There will be no time limit on leaving your home for exercise or socialising outdoors.
The travel distance from your home will increase from 5km to 25km for exercise and shopping.
Outdoor gatherings will increase to 10 people from two households.
Tennis courts, skate parks, golf courses and hairdressers will reopen, subject to Covid-safe restrictions.
Real estate auctions will occur with a maximum of 10 people and commercial real estate inspections can occur.
Outdoor pools can host 30 swimmers. Indoor pools can open up for one-on-one hydrotherapy with a health professional.
The following will be allowed, subject to conditions: non-essential outdoor home maintenance, repairs, renovations and house painting can occur with a maximum of five workers.
Solo or automated car washing and pool cleaning will be allowed, mobile or home business pet grooming will be allowed, outdoor photography will be allowed, and there will be a full return of allied health services.
From 2 November the following changes to restrictions will occur
The four reasons for leaving home will be removed and people will be able to leave their home for any reason.
A maximum of two people, plus children, will be able to visit another home once per day. This won't be a "bubble" arrangement as currently applies to single people in Melbourne.
More businesses will reopen subject to conditions.
Retail will reopen. Hospitality will reopen with a maximum of 20 people inside and 50 outside.
Beauty and personal services will return.
Outdoor sport and recreation for a household or up to 10 people in a group will be permitted.
Outdoor community contact sport for under 18-year-olds and non-contact sport for adults will recommence.
Outdoor fitness and dance classes with 10 people, not including the trainer, can resume.
A maximum of 20 people will be allowed for outdoor religious gatherings. A maximum of 10 people will be allowed at weddings. A maximum of 20 mourners will be permitted at funerals.
Outdoor seated entertainment will be able to host a maximum of 50 people or 25% of the venue's fixed seat capacity.
The Victorian government says it will consider introducing some of these measures before 1 November if it is safe to do so.
More information is available here.
From 19 October the following changes to restrictions are in place
Two adults and two children will be able to visit a home.
Hospitality venues can increase their capacity to 70 people outside and 40 people inside.
Outdoor religious gatherings will increase to 20 people.
Indoor pools will open for people 18 and under to a maximum of 20 people.
One-on-one hydrotherapy with health professionals will also be allowed.
Libraries and toy libraries will reopen to a maximum of 20 people.
Households will be able to visit a care facility, rather than one person visiting at a time.
From 2 November the following changes to restrictions will occur
Non-contact indoor physical recreation, such as dance classes, will resume for under 18-year-olds, up to a maximum of 20 people. Spectators are limited to one parent, guardian or carer only, where the child requires parental supervision.
Non-contact indoor community sport will resume for under 18-year-olds. The same limits on spectators apply.
Indoor trampolining centres reopen for under 18-year-olds with the same limits as those that apply for indoor physical recreation.
More information can be found here.