Scott Morrison strikes deal with NT to quarantine stranded Australians at Howard Springs
Flights will be sold by Qantas, which has been given a priority list of 'vulnerable' Australians
Australians stranded overseas will have access to the Northern Territory Howard Springs facility for quarantine, until at least March, helping up to 5,000 people come home.
Scott Morrison announced the commonwealth had come to an arrangement with the NT government to extend the use of the facility, which has been used to quarantine returned travellers to the territory.
The first travellers to benefit will be those who have been stranded in the UK. Flights will be sold by Qantas, which has been given a priority list of Australians identified by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade as "vulnerable". Flights from India and South Africa are still being finalised.
Travellers will be charged $2,500 for their two-week quarantine in the Howard Springs facility.
There are close to 30,000 overseas Australians who have registered to come home, but have been unable to find flights, with states imposing caps on the number of weekly returns to keep hotel quarantine programs under control.
"Our high commission there [in the UK] is contacting all of those individuals and giving them the opportunity, through Qantas, to be on those flights so they can return," Morrison said.
"But the good news is of the around about [sic] just over 4,000 Australians Dfat identified as vulnerable on 18 September, just over a quarter of those have now been able to return to Australia and we're making very good progress on ensuring that more and more Australians are getting home.
"And as those places continue to open up at our major points of entry, when we can get, in particular, Melbourne back online, that will make a big difference and we look forward to that happening as soon as that can."
Morrison made the announcement in Sydney after being stranded in Queensland overnight because of a technical issue with his VIP jet. The delay meant he had to postpone the national cabinet meeting, which was to be the first in a month, after the last meeting was cancelled because of the federal budget.
Morrison drew criticism for missing the the meeting, but he claimed there were not available facilities for the secure meeting.
The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, spoke before Morrison's announcement and said the Howard Springs decision had taken too long, given how many Australians had been crying out for assistance.
"I welcome it, but it's so late," he said. "It's two months since we've been calling for use of all the assets at our disposal. And the NT government of chief minister [Michael] Gunner has been raising this issue for many weeks. The WA government have offered facilities.
"We have circumstances in Australia where there are 29,000 Australians stranded overseas. We've never had in our history more airplanes that were free, in terms of not being used. And we've never had so many hotels with empty rooms. It seems to me that it's not rocket science to try and put those two things together."
Morrison also used his announcement to look forward, saying Australia was returning to "some new type of normal" and needed to plan for the future.
As part of that, he said the national security committee had also resolved to slowly move ahead with plans for a "traffic light system", to open up Australia's closed international borders to select countries and travellers.
But the prime minister warned it was still "many months off" from being a reality.
"It will look at home isolation to corporates who are returning from various parts of the world and put in place their own corporate arrangements for quarantine that would meet standards that would need to be in place, that would be at least equivalent to what is done in the publicly-run facilities or supported, I should say, through the hotel quarantine arrangements for returning Australian citizens," he said of the sketch.
"And so that means that we can work to try and get back to a new kind of normal for Australia, as much as getting Australians home is our top priority when it comes to utilising these quarantine arrangements, our other priority is to get Australia back to a safe level of engaging with the rest of the world.
"And in priority areas. That of course is in areas like students and business visitors to Australia, and the like. And, potentially, other visitors."