Manchester united: ministers' tier 3 talks enrage both Labour and Tories
A series of calls about northern England Covid restrictions left even the government's own MPs denouncing a 'shambles'
Andy Burnham woke up on Thursday resigned to the fact he had probably failed.
For the last week, the mayor of Greater Manchester had been doing his best to stop the government from imposing tighter restrictions on his 2.8 million constituents, who had already been banned from socialising indoors since the end of July.
Then a leak to journalists seemed to confirm he had lost. "Millions facing new lockdown," splashed Thursday's Times. It claimed Greater Manchester and Lancashire would be placed in the "very high" tier 3 category alongside the Liverpool city region, prompting the closure of all drinking establishments.
London, meanwhile, would be pushed into tier 2, subjecting 9 million residents of the capital to pretty much the same restrictions much of the north had been under since the summer.
But while London's mayor, Sadiq Khan, approved the change for his region, the same could not be said of the leaders and MPs in Greater Manchester and Lancashire.
A series of calls were planned for Thursday morning, ostensibly to get them to agree to the imposition of tier 3, before Matt Hancock's statement in the Commons at 11.30am.
They didn't go to plan.
Burnham, along with Greater Manchester's 10 leaders, went first, in a call at 10am.
Sean Fielding, the 30-year-old leader of Oldham council, described how Sir Ed Lister, the prime minister's adviser, "had clearly been sent to tell us we were going in tier 3, but he bottled it because he got so much pushback".
Nothing at all was offered to bring the leaders onside, said Fielding, despite them having sent ahead a list of demands, including upping the hospitality furlough to 80% and more support for local test and trace.
"It ended with Lister saying, 'OK, we will take that away, but don't expect us to come back with anything.' So what was the bloody point of the meeting?"
Saying no to a group of Labour leaders may not be difficult for the government, but Greater Manchester's sole Tory leader, Bolton's David Greenhalgh, was among them – and was one of "the most vocal", said Fielding.
"He's against tier 3 because he had all the pubs close in Bolton and saw the damage it caused and how it didn't get the infections down. The only thing he isn't in favour of, which we are, is a national circuit breaker."
The leaders had been galvanised by a conversation they had the previous night with Jonathan Van-Tam, the deputy chief medical officer.
He told them that "to bring the infection rates down, any regional lockdown would require widespread closures, way beyond pubs, to stand any real chance of working and that would have to be done in tandem with other neighbouring regions and even then it would not be certain to work", Burnham told reporters in a defiant press conference on Thursday afternoon.
"We were saying to Ed Lister: why do you want us to agree to something your own medical adviser thinks won't work? And he couldn't answer," said Fielding.
But it was on the next call, with Greater Manchester's MPs and the care minister Helen Whately, that things got really uncomfortable.
Nine of the region's 27 constituencies are now Conservative, including Burnham's own "red wall" former seat of Leigh.
Before the call, the Labour MPs agreed they would led the Conservatives go first.
"We all basically agree," one of the Labour MPs said, "but for them it's more about the libertarian aspect, whereas for us it's about the support package on offer. For us, tier 3 is guaranteed destitution. It's not just the fact that you will have minimum-wage earners seeing their income drop two-thirds to £5.60 an hour, but there's also a question of eligibility for support.
"Shitshow doesn't even begin to summarise that meeting. We let the Tory MPs go first and they piled into [Whately] saying: what's the point of this meeting if you are just going to brief to the media that you've already made a decision?"
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
It was a total waste of time, William Wragg, the Conservative MP for Hazel Grove in Stockport, complained to the health secretary, Matt Hancock, in the Commons later. "You may as well talk to a wall," he grumbled.
It was a similar story on a call between Lancashire's MPs and Jo Churchill, a junior health minister.
"She didn't know her arse from her elbow," complained one Labour MP. "She had no idea of the geography and just couldn't understand it when Rosie Cooper [the Labour MP for West Lancashire] began by saying there was going to be an obvious problem this weekend when the Everton-Liverpool derby takes place and all the pubs in Liverpool are shut so people are going to pour over the border to Ormskirk and Skelmersdale."
Mark Menzies, the Conservative MP for the Fylde, got so cross that he wasn't allowed to ask questions that he hung up in frustration, said the MP: "I have never seen him that angry. He was saying, 'It's outrageous, it's a shambles.'"
The call with Lancashire's councils went little better.
Before anything had been agreed the goalposts already seemed to have shifted as to what tier 3 means, said Matthew Brown, the Labour leader of Preston council.
Officials said "you need to think about other sectors", he claimed. "Gyms, cafes, restaurants, beauty businesses and other things. But we don't know what they are offering still in terms of the package so it is very difficult to accept what they want to do."
By the time Hancock turned up in the Commons, 10 minutes late, he looked harassed. His speech seemed to go out of his way not to mention Greater Manchester or Lancashire by name.
"We think he just cut those bits out of his speech just beforehand when officials told him we weren't having it," said Fielding.
Instead, Hancock heaped now customary – and unwanted – praise on the leaders of the Liverpool city region for their "public service and cross-party teamwork" after they were bounced into tier 3.
"Discussions are ongoing with local leaders on moving from high to very high," said Hancock.
But forcing Manchester into a tier 3 lockdown it doesn't want comes with huge risks.
Whitehall officials worry that Burnham has the power to undermine it from the start – by making clear he doesn't accept it.
Without a compromise, the damage may have already been done.