Students retaking GSCE exams in November 'may pose public health risk'
College leaders have written to the education minister about issues around Covid pandemic
College leaders in England have warned that large numbers of students retaking maths and English GCSEs next month could pose a public health risk, as coronavirus infection rates continue to rise in many parts of the country.
Tens of thousands of students, whose GCSEs were cancelled over the summer, are due to sit the exams in further education colleges across the country, including many in high-risk areas where tighter restrictions are already in place to try to reduce transmission.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
Colleges have raised concerns about the logistics of bringing together large volumes of students to sit exams. Some are considering closing their campuses to other students on exam days to reduce risks, others say the exams should be postponed.
The Association of Colleges (AOC) has written to education minister Nick Gibb calling for urgent talks. It says colleges in high- and very-high-risk areas of the North West, Yorkshire and West Midlands are reporting a significantly higher number of resits than in previous years, with some having to accommodate more than 500 students.
AOC's chief executive, David Hughes, wrote: "Colleges will of course apply the social distancing and health measures … to minimise the risks, but for many it will result in the closure of entire campuses to other students on the exam days to manage numbers safely. Controlling entry and exit points will be a particular issue because exams have fixed start and end times."
He went on: "We have serious concerns about the potential public health risks this presents and would welcome urgent discussion about whether going ahead with this series of exams is the right thing to do."
Hughes said the recent rapid increase in infections and advice from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies that all college teaching should move online where possible were worrying college leaders "who want to make the right balance between safety of students and supporting them to take these exams".
A pass – or level 4 – in GCSE English and maths is critical for student progression to further and higher education, as well as many apprenticeships. Ordinarily, there are around 50,000 resits, but there are expected to be far higher numbers this year as students who were unable to sit their exams due to the pandemic seek to improve on their school-assessed grades. Students will face no additional costs this year, due to the exceptional circumstances.
Alison Arnaud, principal at Hackney and Tower Hamlets, New City College, said the number of resits had gone up from 50-100 in an average year at her college to more than 400 each for English and maths. All students will sit three maths papers and two English.
"It was right to offer these learners the opportunity. Whether the timing is right given where the lockdown is now is not a question I feel qualified to answer, but it concerns me. If the government had really thought about this, this should have been a January thing." All 32 boroughs in London will move up to the second tier of coronavirus restrictions later this week.
John Callaghan, principal at Solihull College and University Centre, said his college was accommodating 655 resits in maths and 389 in English at a cost of about £50,000. In a normal year he said there would be 20-30 candidates for each. Solihull is also in the high-tier category.
"We are concerned," he said. "It's the first time we've mixed our 'bubbles' and we'll be bringing different people together." There have been 30 positive cases out of a total of 8,000 students plus four members of staff .
"We've managed our Covid cases really well," said Callaghan, who acknowledged the November exams could present additional challenges. "At the end of the day we've got to do it, so let's do it in the most responsible, safe way we can."
The AOC's letter also raised concerns about digital poverty, which continues to create barriers to learning for students who find themselves working at home, and increased demand for student mental health support, which requires additional investment.
Following the government's confirmation earlier this week that GCSEs and A-levels will go ahead next summer though three weeks later than usual, Hughes warned there would be even greater logistical challenges because of the numbers of students involved.
"We would hope that transport and site management issues will be easier by that stage, but for colleges there will be very large cohorts of candidates in popular exam subjects and in GCSE English and maths which will need special planning."
The Department for Education has been contacted for comment.