Ryanair cuts one in three winter flights and warns of more job losses
Reductions extended to 2021 as chief executive rails at government 'mismanagement'
Ryanair is cutting the number of its winter flights by a third because of Covid air travel restrictions across the EU and has warned of further job losses as passenger numbers plummet.
The airline previously cut the number of flights in October to around 40% of normal levels, but is now extending the reduction through November to March, down from the 60% previously planned. It is still hoping to keep its planes 70% full, in order to break even and "minimise cash burn".
Airbus – 1,700 jobs30 June: The European planemaker announcedplans to cut 15,000 jobs, including 1,700 in the UK, as it warned the coronavirus pandemic had triggered the "gravest crisis" in its history.
Swissport – 4,500 jobs24 June: Swissport, which handles passenger baggage and cargo for airlines, has begun a consultation process to make 4,556 workers redundant, more than half of its 8,500 UK workforce.
Bombardier – 600 jobs11 June: The Canadian planemaker will cut 600 jobs in Northern Ireland, as part of 2,500 redundancies announced in June.
Rolls-Royce – 9,000 jobs3 June: The jet-engine manufacturer has confirmed that 3,000 job cuts, of a planned 9,000 worldwide, will be made in sites in the UK.
easyJet – 4,500 jobs28 May: The airline has announcedplans to cut 4,500 employees, or 30% of its workforce, as it prepared for lower demand.
Tui – 8,000 jobs13 May: Travel company Tui plans to cutup to 8,000 jobs worldwide in response to the coronavirus chaos engulfing the tourism industry.
Virgin Atlantic – 3,000 jobs5 May: Richard Branson's airline is tocut more than 3,000 jobs, more than a third of its workforce, and will shut its operations at Gatwick.
Ryanair – 3,000 jobs1 May: The Irish airlineintends to slash 3,000 roles and reduce staff pay by up to a fifth.
Aer Lingus – 900 jobs1 May: The Irish flag carrier, part of International Airlines Group (IAG), plans to cut 900 jobs.
British Airways – 12,000 jobs28 April: The UK flag carrier plans tomake up to 12,000 of its staff redundant, a reduction of one in four jobs at the airline, with cabin crew, pilots and ground staff affected.
Meggitt – 1,800 jobs23 April: British engineering company Meggitt plans toshed about 1,800 jobs making parts for commercial aviation.
Safran – 400 jobs23 April: French aircraft seat maker Safran made400 job cuts at its UK operations, including a plant in Cwmbran.
Flybe – 400 jobs5 March: Flybe, Europe's largest regional airline, collapsed into administration with the loss of more than 2,000 jobs, less than two months after a government bailout.
"There will regrettably be more redundancies at those small number of cabin crew bases, where we have still not secured agreement on working time and pay cuts, which is the only alternative," said Michael O'Leary, Ryanair's chief executive.
"While we deeply regret these winter schedule cuts they have been forced upon us by government mismanagement of EU air travel."
Ryanair, along with other European airlines and airports, had been lobbying for a harmonised approach to air travel during the pandemic, to ensure – at the least – more predictable and consistent rules on cross-border travel.
However, the European council agreed a recommendation only this week, issuing guidance on restrictions for member states that fell far below the aviation industry's hopes.
Ryanair said it was "inevitable" that pilots and cabin crew would also have to take more unpaid leave and participate in job sharing this winter, adding that it was a better outcome than "mass job losses".
The airline said it would maintain most of its winter route network, but offer fewer flights. It is already temporarily shutting bases this winter in Cork and Shannon in Ireland and in Toulouse, France. It will now cut the number of flights from bases including those in Austria, Belgium, Germany, Portugal and Spain.
Ryanair has also cut its full-year traffic forecast to 38 million passengers, down from 50 million. Last year it had 149 million passengers.
"This guidance could be further revised downwards if EU governments continue to mismanage air travel and impose more lockdowns this winter," the airline said.
"We continue to actively manage our cost base to be prepared for the inevitable rebound and recovery of short-haul air travel in Europe once an effective Covid-19 vaccine is developed."
Ryanair's move comes despite signals that the quarantine period for travellers arriving in the UK could soon be cut from 14 days to about a week under a "test and release" scheme being considered by the government's taskforce, which will report in November.
The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said on Wednesday the new regime would probably require a single coronavirus test, to be taken about a week after arrival and paid for privately.
The amended rules are unlikely to satisfy the aviation and travel industry, which has argued for rapid airport testing. According to Iata, the global airline body, quarantine deters almost as many passengers as would an outright travel ban.
Ryanair shares fell almost 4% on news of the schedule cuts. EasyJet's stock dropped by a similar amount.
Gerald Khoo, a transport analyst at Liberum Capital, said: "The path to recovery from the pandemic was never going to be direct or smooth. Ryanair's plan of 40% of prior year is still considerably more than easyJet's 25% target. However, it appears more realistic than the 75% of normal indicated by current published timetables for the industry as a whole."
Khoo said Ryanair's strong balance sheet, low cost base and focus on leisure routes meant it was "the best positioned European airline to cope with what is likely to be a very tough winter and prolonged recovery phase".