Liverpool mayor says partying crowds 'shame city' before Covid lockdown
Joe Anderson condemns attacks on police as city moves into tier 3 restrictions
Liverpool's mayor has condemned large crowds of revellers who gathered in the city centre hours before lockdown measures kicked in and threw drinks at police cars, saying their actions "shame our city".
Intensive care doctors in the city said they were "disgusted" by the scenes, while police said there would be "additional patrols" to help enforce the new measures.
Videos on social media showed huge crowds of people dancing and singing in Concert Square, a popular nightlife spot, at 10pm after pubs and bars closed for the last time before stricter lockdown measures came into force at midnight.
The Liverpool city region is the only part of the country to move into the highest tier 3 lockdown restrictions on Wednesday, meaning pubs and bars which do not serve meals have been forced to close, and social mixing is banned indoors and in private gardens. Gyms, betting shops and casinos have also been shut, while restaurants are allowed to stay open.
The city's mayor, Joe Anderson, criticised the partygoers, saying: "These pictures shame our city, attacking our brave police officers is unacceptable. Our health service is creaking, 300 in hospital and 30 people dead in week, ignoring these facts is why we are in tier 3 measures."
Downing Street also condemned the "irresponsible" behaviour, with the prime minister's official spokesman saying: "In terms of what were the actions of a minority of people, I think you would have to judge it as irresponsible in the sense that we shouldn't be doing anything that risks putting others in danger of catching the virus."
Videos posted on social media show crowds flouting social distancing rules, many not wearing masks, as they dance, chant and sing songs in the middle of the square.
Another video, taken from a nearby flat, shows the crowds booing at a police car as it moves into the square, before throwing drinks at the vehicle and banging on the windows.
Merseyside police said officers were deployed to the area immediately and a large crowd was dispersed quickly and safely, no arrests were made and no police vehicles were damaged.
One intensive care doctor working in Liverpool told Sky News: "They don't care that people are dying from this disease, it is heartbreaking to watch."
Another added: "We are running at 100% capacity. Our emergency departments are overcrowded. No social distancing possible. I am dreading we are heading towards a disaster.
"Then you see crowds behaving such a way. I am really devastated and disgusted."
Chief Supt Peter Costello said there would be "additional patrols on the streets" to enforce the new rules. "Obviously it's extremely disappointing to see so many people choose to blatantly flout the Covid rules and put themselves and other people at risk," he said.
Liverpool has the third-highest number of Covid-19 hospital admissions in Europe, and more than 95% of the city's intensive care beds are occupied.
About half of the intensive care beds across the city's University hospitals NHS foundation trust have been taken by patients being treated for Covid-19.