England's tug of war on Covid-19 restrictions: Politics Weekly podcast
Jessica Elgot and Helen Pidd break down the three-tier risk system now in place in England. Lisa O'Carroll and Mujtaba Rahman look at the latest Brexit negotiations. Plus, Rajeev Syal speaks to Meg Hillier MP, chair of the public accounts committee
Keir Starmer used his first televised press conference as Labour leader to call for a national 'circuit breaker' to be imposed, in a dramatic escalation of his criticism of the government's approach.
The call came after documents released by the government's scientific advisory group (Sage) showed that Boris Johnson's cabinet had ignored most of the advice presented to them weeks ago to try and reduce the spread of coronavirus.
So, as the government abandons the science and the opposition stops supporting the government, where does that leave the rest of us?
In an already busy week, Boris Johnson will also have an eye on Brexit negotiations as we encroach on the 15 October deadline that the prime minister insisted would be the final date for talks before needing to accept a no-deal Brexit. So, how are the talks going?
Plus, in the first of several interviews with chairs of parliamentary select committees, Rajeev Syal talks to Meg Hillier about how the public accounts committee examines the value for money of government projects – such as Brexit and Covid-19 spending.
The Guardian is editorially independent.
And we want to keep our journalism open and accessible to all.
But we increasingly need our readers to fund our work.
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.