Keir Starmer presses Boris Johnson on why he rejected Covid 'circuit breaker'
Labour leader asks PM about decision to ignore Sage advice to impose national measures
Keir Starmer has piled more pressure on Boris Johnson over his refusal to implement a national "circuit breaker" lockdown in England, confronting the prime minister about why he ignored top scientific advisers who urged him to impose the measure.
The Labour leader questioned Johnson on why he rejected Sage's advice last month to introduce such a two-week lockdown to stem the spread of Covid-19, in a move Starmer characterised as abandoning the science.
During fiery scenes at prime minister's questions, Johnson defended the new three-tier system that the government unveiled this week, insisting it could bring down the R number. He also accused Starmer of opportunism and performing a U-turn after previously backing government measures. Hitting back, Starmer claimed the prime minister had been "an opportunist all his life" and made clear he did not think the government's approach went far enough.
Starmer had urged the government on Tuesday to "follow the science" and impose a circuit breaker of at least two weeks to stem the spread of Covid-19.
Starmer's intervention followed the release of advice from the government's Sage committee, which warned ministers three weeks ago that the country faced a "very large epidemic with catastrophic consequences" unless they took immediate action by imposing a two-week circuit breaker.
Locking horns with Johnson over the government's failure to take up the advice – instead, it announced on Monday a three-tiered system of localised lockdown measures – Starmer painted a bleak picture of the cost. He told the Commons on Wednesday: "Since he rejected Sage's advice on the 21st of September, I remind him, the R rate has gone up, the infection rate has quadrupled, hospital admissions have gone from 275 a day to 628 a day in England.
"Yesterday, 441 Covid patients were on ventilators, and the number of deaths recorded was, tragically, the highest since June the 10th. That's the cost of rejecting the advice.
"Sage has a clear view on why that's happening. What's the prime minister's view on why these numbers are all heading in the wrong direction?"
In response, Johnson explained the disease was "appearing much more strongly in some parts of the country than in others", adding: "That is why the tiered approach, three-tiered approach that we set out on Monday, and that he then supported, is the right way forward. And we want to put in the most stringent measures necessary in the places where the virus is surging in order to get it down where it is surging ... that is the logical thing to do."
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
Starmer also put pressure on the prime minister over test and trace, which he said had gone "so wrong", highlighting Sage's view that the system is only having a marginal impact on transmission. Johnson defended the system and turned his fire on Starmer, saying: "He wants to close pubs, he wants to close bars, he wants to close businesses in areas across the country where the incidence is low … That's what he wants to do and he wants to do it now.
"And yet he voted to do nothing last night, nothing in the areas where the incidence is highest. He says one thing at 5pm calling for a national lockdown. When it came to a vote in this House of Commons, Mr Speaker, to impose more stringent measures, he failed to even turn up."
In response, Starmer said: "I know that for someone who has been an opportunist all his life … this is difficult to understand. But having read and considered the Sage advice, I have genuinely concluded that a circuit break is in the national interest."