Blame ministers for pub closures, says Liverpool city region mayor
Steve Rotheram says bailout for areas under tier 3 Covid lockdown is 'simply no good'
The Liverpool city region mayor, Steve Rotheram, has told residents to blame pub closures on "the mess the government have made in their handling of the crisis", ahead of tier 3 lockdown restrictions being imposed on the area.
Rotheram stressed that the financial package on offer for areas affected by the strictest measures was "simply no good" and that local leaders had been given little say in the decision by government.
"What has been portrayed as a negotiation between us and them was anything but," he said during a press conference on Tuesday, adding that ministers had "already made their minds up" about imposing a tier 3 lockdown on Liverpool before discussions began.
Rotheram is among northern leaders, including the Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham, who are lobbying the government for greater support for affected businesses, including increasing the local furlough scheme from 67% of wages to 80%.
His comments came after the prime minister, Boris Johnson, thanked Rotheram and colleagues for their "cooperation" in agreement for measures in Merseyside during an announcement of the new tier system in the Commons on Monday.
Liverpool and surrounding Merseyside face the toughest local lockdown restrictions under the system and will move into the "very high" alert level from Wednesday.
Under the rules, people cannot socialise with anyone outside their household in any indoor and most outdoor settings, while travel in and out of the affected areas is advised against.
Pubs, bars, gyms, betting shops, casinos and adult gaming centres will be forced to close, although restaurants will be allowed to remain open. Pubs that serve "substantial meals" will also be allowed to remain open, although they may only serve alcohol with food.
While the government has not specified what constitutes a substantial meal, on Tuesday morning, the housing secretary, Robert Jenrick, told radio station LBC that a Cornish pasty on its own, for example, did not count.
"If you would expect to go into that restaurant normally, or pub, and order a plated meal at the table of a Cornish pasty with chips or side salad or whatever it comes with, then that's a normal meal," he added.
Few so-called "wet" pubs, which only serve alcohol, in the Liverpool city region are likely to be able to switch to being a food-based pub, however, as most do not have kitchens or the food licence required.
On Tuesday, few bars and pubs in Liverpool's city centre believed residents would flock to the city centre for one last night out before the new measures were imposed.
Although Liverpool's hospitality association said it expected "a bit of extra drinking" in the evening, managers said the city was "dead" in the afternoon.
"No one seems to be out at the moment – I think a lot of people are staying away anyway," said Yvonne Taylor at the Liverpool Pub on James Street. "Our takings have gone down since they brought the [10pm curfew] in."
The Historic England-listed Philharmonic Dining Rooms, once frequented by the Beatles and regarded as a "cathedral among pubs" for its architectural quality, was also quiet with few customers, while a manager at one of the many chain-bars in Concert Square said staff were expecting a "normal" slow day.
Additional reporting by Josh Halliday