Get stuck in, cut red tape: what we've learned about social work during the pandemic
From the joy of chatting with colleagues to the importance of simplifying our systems, these are the lessons of lockdown
Back in March, as managers in an adult social work service, we were forced to go into high-speed, adrenaline-fuelled planning mode. In the space of two weeks, we went from knowing there were confirmed Covid-19 cases in the UK to full lockdown, and our staff moved out of offices and into home working.
Then the first wave hit. Like everyone else, we hoped our families would keep safe; we got our heads down and got through the spring. When summer arrived, we noticed how tired our social workers were. So we slowed down and made sure social workers in our services booked leave and spent time with people they cared about.
Now it's autumn, and a new academic year has started. New social work students are joining the profession. It's a time of learning. Before the pandemic second wave, we should use this time to pause, reflect and work out what happened this year, and what we can do better this winter.
This is what we've learned:
The humility to give up the power and status that comes with having a professional title, and instead get stuck into doing practical things that safeguard dignity, is the heart of good social work. The pandemic has reminded us that what matters to people are the small things that enable them to feel in control of their lives.
Social workers aren't wearing high-visibility jackets leading the emergency response. They don't provide hands-on care for people who are really ill. Having the humility to work quietly in the background has been important to our social workers. They see their role as being to ensure the people they support have enough of the things that are important to them to maintain their dignity and safety. Social workers are going shopping for food, toilet rolls, continence pads, bleach and plastic gloves. One of our social workers spent an afternoon buying 30 bottles of cherryade and 50 frozen pizzas as they were all a young autistic, learning disabled person they supported would eat and drink.
We aren't natural home workers. Our worlds have shrunk from being in a big open plan office in a city centre, to a core of about eight people we see daily on a video call – all very lovely people, but we thrive as part of something bigger. We might have saved money by cutting out the daily commute and not having to put into the tea fund, but we've lost more than we've saved. We can't wait for the return of Macmillan bake-off fundraising days and our social care curry nights out.
We have also learned just how important it is being able to think out loud, face-to-face over a coffee with social workers from other backgrounds and cultures, whose take on a situation is different to ours. Hearing yourself say your ideas out loud to another social worker is the first step to reflection. Social workers are social by nature; we need colleagues to bounce off to be properly critically reflective and make sure our interventions are working.
We've relearned that community is at the heart of good social work, and we rely on good neighbours who care about each other. When lockdown shut down communities, the number of calls to report a concern about the safety of people with care and support needs to our service dropped. Shops, pubs, faith centres and bookies that kept an eye on people, letting us know they were OK, were closed. Good social work needs community safety networks to keep each other safe.
An unintended consequence of furloughing of workers was that some family members took the opportunity to do what they do best: look after the people they love. When services stopped, families stepped in. Family members will always understand the needs of their loved ones far more than any professionals will through a formalised assessment. We learned we were able to rapidly overhaul and simplify  our over bureaucratic systems. We also learned that people, their families and carers put in place emergency backup plans and support arrangements that were better than anything we thought possible.
Wherever we find ourselves on the other side of coronavirus, our main learning from this year is that social care relies on people who care. Friends and family give their time for free and in return need understanding, a break and a hand to bust energy-sapping bureaucracy. In an industry yet to tackle low wages and zero-hour contacts, care workers were the frontline, the lifeline and the most reluctant of heroes.
Our most insightful learning from this experience is that, when it came to it, we did our bit but it wasn't us who saved the day. If we are able to change anything as a result of this learning, it must be that Covid is the catalyst in ensuring real change in finally recognising through remuneration the value of family, friends, homecare workers and care assistants.
Rob Mitchell is a principal social worker and Elaine James manages a social work service supporting children and adults with disabilities. They are co-authors of the book Social Work, Cats and Rocket Science. All views are their own