Police report rise in Covid rule breaches in north of England
Manchester and Newcastle incidents included parties and woman fined £1,000 for not self-isolating
Reports of Covid-19 restrictions breaches have increased in parts of the north of England in the run-up to stricter local lockdowns being announced, with some councillors warning about "vexatious" false claims of neighbours breaking the rules.
Greater Manchester police said it issued 70 fixed penalty notices (FPNs) on Saturday and Sunday for rule breaking, including a student house party of up to 100 people and a lack of social distancing in pubs.
Anyone entering England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland from somewhere that is not on that country's list of exempt travel corridors is required to go into self-isolation for 14 days.
You can't get round the rules by using a different airport. For instance, as of 4 September travellers returning to Wales and Scotland from Portugal are required to quarantine. This is true even if they fly into an English airport, despite Portugal still being on England's green list.
Everyone entering the UK, including British nationals, must fill in a passenger locator form, regardless of whether or not they need to quarantine. The form asks travellers to provide their contact details and UK address.If someone who is required to self-isolate does not provide an address, the government will arrange accommodation at the traveller's expense.
For 14 days, starting from the day after arrival, people who are quarantining should not:
The quarantine rules apply to everyone apart from selected groups of people such as freight drivers, very regular business travellers, and politicians or other dignitaries.
The travel restrictions are being frequently updated, and are available on the relevant government and administration websites linked to here, with separate lists covering England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
Northumbria police also said there had been a "significant rise" in action being taken against people ignoring lockdown rules, with officers attending more than 500 incidents in Newcastle upon Tyne in the fortnight to 8 October.
In a 48-hour period last week, the force issued 137 fines, including a woman £1,000 penalty to a woman for going shopping when she should have been self-isolating, after a holiday in a country not on the government's travel corridor list.
Meanwhile, a Teesside mayor has expressed concern about residents making bogus reports of "wild parties" at their neighbours' homes.
Steve Walmsley, the mayor of Thornaby, said the false accusations had included "one 84-year-old who was having a wild rave in her garden when she was just there with her granddaughter".
Walmsley told Cleveland's police and crime panel last week the system was being used to target those who had reported crime in the area.
Residents in the north-east and Greater Manchester are prevented from mixing with other households, excluding support bubbles, inside their homes or gardens under local lockdown restrictions.
Of the 70 FPNs issued by officers in Greater Manchester in recent days, 28 were handed out in nine locations in Bolton on Friday for indoor gatherings.
On Saturday, police attended a gathering at a property in Withington, in south Manchester, where 70-100 students were believed to be in attendance. Officers issued seven FPNs, and the force said a noise abatement order was also due to be issued.
At a separate house party on Saturday, in Fallowfield, an area of Manchester where many students live, the force issued four FPNs after up to 20 people attempted to flee from the property when officers arrived.
The force said a pub in Didsbury, also in the south of the city, voluntarily closed on Friday evening after police and licensing officers from Manchester city council attended after a report of social distancing rules being broken.
The Manchester City councillor Rabnawaz Akbar said the incident was a reminder that premises had a responsibility to "keep their customers and staff safe and we and our partners will take firm action against establishments which do not take this seriously".