NHS England to invest £10m in clinics to help 'long Covid' patients
Concern thousands of people unable to get the care they need to recover from prolonged symptoms
More than £10m is being spent on a network of NHS clinics across England for people with "long Covid".
The head of NHS England, Simon Stevens, announced the investment on Wednesday amid concern that hundreds of thousands of people may be unable to get the care they need to recover from prolonged and debilitating symptoms.
Estimates have suggested that 10% of Covid patients may still experience symptoms more than three weeks after infection, and up to 60,000 people may suffer from long-term effects after more than three months.
Speaking at the NHS Providers conference, Stevens said: "We are going to be allocating £10m to establish a network of designated long Covid clinics across the country which, in line with new Nice [National Institute for Health and Care Excellence] guidelines on effective patient treatment pathways, will offer support for the tens of thousands – probably hundreds of thousands – of patients who have got long Covid."
In addition to the £10m from the NHS, there will be additional local funding to help establish a clinic in every area across England.
Respiratory consultants, physiotherapists, other specialists and GPs will assess, diagnose and treat patients who have reported symptoms ranging from breathlessness to chronic fatigue, "brain fog", anxiety and stress.
Patients will be able to get physical, cognitive and psychological assessments, which can identify chronic health issues, memory, attention and concentration problems and mental health conditions including PTSD.
Post-assessment, they can be referred to specialist lung disease services, sleep clinics, cardiac or rehabilitation services, or signposted into mental health services.
NHS England has already commissioned Nice to produce guidance on a medical case definition of long Covid by the end of October, to be followed by guidelines next month on the treatment that patients should receive. Meanwhile, the National Institute for Health Research is working with 10,000 patients to better understand the condition and refine appropriate treatment.
Stevens told the virtual conference: "The NHS that comes out the other side of Covid is going to be a different NHS from the one that went into this pandemic … We have got new needs that we are going to have to address and will have to be factored into the capacity of the NHS, whether it's long Covid, whether it's dealing with the backlog of patients waiting for routine operations, whether it's for some of the psychological and mental health consequences of the pandemic – those new care needs will need addressing."