What are the three proposed tiers of local lockdown for England?
Leaked document has revealed plans for alert system intended to reduce confusion over rules
A leaked document has revealed plans for three tiers of local lockdown measures in England to curb the spread of coronavirus and reduce confusion caused by a patchwork of regional restrictions. The document, dated 30 September and seen by the Guardian, describes the levels as follows:
Represents the baseline, the minimum level of restrictions applicable to all of England.
Social contact
Rule of six.
Childcare bubbles (for under-15s/years 9 and 10) children (or vulnerable adults) where necessary for caring purposes (to be a consistent childcare relationship, not for playdates).
Wedding and civil partnership ceremonies and services up to 15 attendees.
Funeral up to 30 attendees only.
Significant event gatherings up to 15 only.
Support groups up to 15 only.
No mass events eg. sports events and pilot performances.
Organised sport only allowed outdoors.
Visiting indoor hospitality/leisure/retail settings under rule [sic].
Businesses
All sectors which are permitted to open by law can remain so providing they meet Covid-19 secure guidance.
Face coverings and/or screens for all workers in indoor hospitality (chefs, waiting staff, etc) and customers apart from when seated.
Curfews on business operating hours. Leisure and entertainment venues must be closed between 10pm and 5am. Can continue delivery after 10pm.
Food and drink venues will be table service only.
More stringent Covid-19 secure guidance and enforcement. Where possible, WFH [working from home] should be encouraged.
Triggered in geographical areas or nationally when there has been a rise in transmission that cannot be contained through local responses.
Social contact
In addition to alert level 1 restrictions (except where noted):
Must not meet others outside their household in private dwellings (apart from support bubble) including outside space in the home ie. gardens [replaces alert level 1 restriction].
Visiting indoor hospitality/leisure/retail settings is restricted to one household ie. two households must not meet in these settings (unless those two households are in a support bubble) even if the total headcount is [sic] [replaces alert level 1 restriction].
People are advised only to visit care homes in exceptional circumstances.
People should only travel for essential reasons.
People can holiday outside of your area but should only do so with the people they live with or have formed a social bubble with.
People can play a team sport only where this is formally organised by a sports club or similar organisation, and sports governing body guidance has been issued.
People should not attend amateur or professional sporting events as a spectator in the areas affected.
Weddings are permitted to have 15 attendees and receptions are not permitted.
Funerals are limited to 15 attendees.
Businesses
[No additional information]
Triggered in geographical areas or nationally when alert level 2 measures have not contained the spread of the virus, or where there has been a significant rise in transmission.
Social contact
In addition to alert level 1 and alert level 2 measures unless noted to be a replacement:
No social contact outside your household in any setting [replaces alert level 2 restriction].
Restrictions on overnight stays away from home (in a private residence in the area under local restrictions) [replaces alert level 2 restriction].
Places of worship can remain open.
No organised non-professional sports permitted/other communal hobby groups/activities (eg. social clubs in community centres) [replaces alert level 2 restriction].
Businesses
In addition to alert level 1 and alert level 2 measures:
Closure of hospitality and leisure businesses [replaces alert level 2 restriction].