Beer today, gone tomorrow: Australian brewers tip 7.8m pints down the drain
Big companies and microbreweries dump millions of litres of old keg beer weeks after pubs were closed to stem spread of coronavirus
One of Australia's largest brewers is tipping 90,000 kegs of beer down the drain.
Lion, which manufactures Tooheys, James Boag, XXXX and other well-known Australian beers, collected the untapped kegs from pubs and clubs in March, after the Australian government declared pubs and restaurants had to shut to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.
The beer has now passed its shelf life and will be tipped into the wastewater treatment plants at the Tooheys and XXXX breweries, which will produce biogas to offset the breweries' natural gas use and be used to brew fresh beer.
The amount to be emptied is equal to 7.8m pints, 10.5m schooners, 11.8m stubbies, or 1.8 Olympic swimming pools.
Lion said it credited venues for $25m in untapped kegs. A spokeswoman said that 23 March, the day the lockdown restrictions were first announced, was "the most gut-wrenching day our industry has ever seen".
The great pouring out is not restricted to Lion. Carlton &amp; United Breweries, Australia's other major beer company, also collected untapped kegs and is now facing the prospect of tipping them out. Both companies distributed growlers to pubs when the lockdown was first announced, to allow venues to on-sell tap beer as takeaway after the Australian Tax Office waved the excise.
At microbreweries across the country, kegs are also being emptied.
Bridge Road Brewers in Beechworth, regional Victoria, has collected more than 700 untapped kegs and credited pubs the value, in a deal that national sales manager Brad Bryce admits is better for the pubs than it is for the brewers.
The quarantine beer will re-emerge in three years, considerably stronger.
"We are looking at a lot of stock at the moment that is slowly going out of date, so we are going to give it to Corowa whisky and they are going to turn it into whisky," Bryce says.
He said if Bridge Road were to open its Beechworth brewery for 10 customers under the first stage of lockdown restrictions being eased, it would be making a loss. But it has beer in the tank waiting to be delivered once the pubs reopen.
According to the Brewers Association of Australia, beer sales from the major brands are down 35% on this time last year.
Pub sales account for 25% to 30% of the market, and the panic buying that followed the 23 March announcement that pubs would be shut has dried up.
For smaller brewers, the year-on-year losses are as high as 70%.
Pubs in the Northern Territory will reopen at midday on Friday, provided patrons do not stay for longer than two hours and order a meals. Pubs with restaurants will also be allowed to reopen for 10 patrons at a time in New South Wales on Friday, and for 20 patrons in Western Australia from Monday.
Victorian premier Daniel Andrews, who became an accidental meme in March by saying the closure of pubs did not mean people could go around to their friends' houses to "get on the beers", said pubs and licensed venues would remain shut under the eased restrictions.
Asked on Monday if people could get on the beers, Andrews said: "No, they cannot.
"There will be a time for that, and no one will enjoy making that announcement more than me, let me assure you of that," he said. "There might even be props involved."