'A huge hit': foreign students may shun Australia after their treatment during Covid-19 crisis
David Bogi says international students like him were treated like cash cows to prop up Australian universities – and then disregarded when the pandemic hit
It's the disingenuousness that upsets David Bogi. The government's cavalier dismissal of the plight of Australia's international students who qualify for no assistance on the one hand, and the insistence that they are valued friends on the other.
It reminds him of a famous scene in the Disney film, Jungle Book, when three vultures sing "That's What Friends Are For" to the hero, Mowgli. It's a dark song full of double entendre about how vultures actually eat other animals.
"It seemed like the prime minister and the education minister and their cronies turned into a bunch of vultures dancing around … singing 'you're our friend'," Bogi says.
Bogi, 27, is a student from India in his final semester in a master of international journalism course at the University of Melbourne. The coronavirus cost him his part-time job as a bartender. His internship at the ABC was cancelled. He has no income and is trying to finish his degree through online classes. He is extremely stressed and is seeing a psychologist.
He is loath to reduce the plight of human beings to raw numbers, but they are stark. The federal government says international students contributed $37.6bn to the economy in 2018-19 in fees, taxes and spending.
Australia has a greater reliance on foreign university students than any other country, with more than 40% of the sector's annual student revenue coming from full fee-paying international students.
Mitchell Institute modelling found they delivered almost $9bn in revenue to universities in 2018 and the sector was facing a loss of between $10bn and $19bn over the next three years from the collapse in the market, depending on how soon border restrictions were relaxed and numbers recovered.
Bogi knows the figures and, like many other students, was stunned when Scott Morrison announced in April that international students who had lost jobs would not qualify for government support. They were permitted to access superannuation if they had any. "There is the alternative for them to return to their home countries," Morrison said.
A few days later, education minister Dan Tehan had a message for international students: "You are our friends, our classmates, our colleagues and members of our community."
Bogi agrees that a government's first priority is to its citizens, but was distraught at the disregard for the people behind the cash cow that is the international student market.
"[Morrison] essentially said 'you're not welcome in this country any more. We're very happy to take your money. We're very happy for you to participate in our economy, to do the work that generally people don't want to do … to be our mail delivery people, to be our food delivery people, to be the ones who come and serve our citizens hand and foot.
"'But apart from that, now that we're all in this crisis, you guys can all go and – excuse my language – but you can all go and bugger off.'"
Tehan's "totally ridiculous" syrup about international friendship "really made me sick to my stomach", he says.
Bogi was a television journalist in a small local station in Hyderabad in southern India when he sought to improve his skills through foreign study. He looked to the United States and Canada but came to Melbourne mostly because he was offered a half scholarship.
International students pay far higher fees than domestic students. But combining his savings, loans and support from his parents, Bogi could afford more than $35,000 for the course after the scholarship was factored in. He got a job in a restaurant and could pay his rent and bills. He is now living in a share house in Brunswick, paying $850 a month in rent.
Bogi knows the common perception of international students as the children of the wealthy.
"There is a certain amount of privilege that we have in order to be able to travel abroad … but it's not been without a cost," he says.
"People generally have to take loans with high interest rates from banks in their home countries to come here. And nobody has asked for fees for international students to be at such a high rate. That's not something that we asked for."
There were some seriously wealthy students at residential colleges, he says, but most "struggle day to day getting cash flow, having to settle for cash-in-hand jobs, doing those jobs that other people don't want to do or see as beneath them. People can't go to a cafe or a restaurant anywhere in the city without those businesses being heavily reliant on migrant labour."
He is disillusioned, too, about what he sees as an underbelly of racism in Australia that has bubbled up during this crisis but was always there. There have been reports of attacks on Chinese Australians and he wishes they would spark a deeper discussion.
"Denial is the go-to strategy, rather than having the conversation even if it is a difficult conversation."
Despite his discomfort, Bogi doesn't want to go home until he finishes the course for which he has paid, and it's not simple to get back to India, anyhow. The country remains in lockdown in most places, and international flights are banned until at least 17 May. India has initiated a rescue operation to repatriate citizens but so far, it doesn't include those in Australia.
Bogi is an only child and worries about his parents in Hyderabad. He thinks he is safer in Australia than in India, with its 1.3 billion people, many of whom are poor and living in overcrowded conditions.
Some international students have resorted to food banks to survive, but so far Bogi hasn't needed them. His parents are sending him money, "although it really pains me to ask them for help because they're in need of all of the resources that they have at the moment". He has filled out forms for assistance from the university's hardship fund, and the state government will provide up to $1,100 for vulnerable international students who have lost work.
"Something is better than nothing," he says.
Friends and strangers have helped out, too. Some have given money. A man dropped groceries on the pavement outside his house. Indian students on social media swap tips on job openings. "It has really renewed my faith in what people can do."
Bogi warns Australia that it will pay a price for what he sees as the dehumanisation of foreign students, aggressively marketing its universities, grasping students' money but washing its hands in a time of crisis.
"I can't imagine that you will be receiving the same amount of money [from international students] in the coming years," he says.
"It is going to take a huge hit, especially when all of us go back to our homes and report back to the younger people who might be aspiring to come to Australia and tell them our story of how we were treated."
Postcards from the pandemic looks at how everyday Australians are coping with immense changes coronavirus has brought to their lives. We'd like to hear your story about how you are managing during this crisis. Email:postcards@theguardian.com