Should I wear a mask? Experts on how we stay safe as Australia eases coronavirus restrictions
Can I hug relatives? Is it safe to pet that dog? Health professionals answer common questions about Covid-19 social distancing
Scott Morrison has laid out a three-step plan to reopen Australia by July, and the states and territories have quickly followed suit with their own timelines for easing coronavirus restrictions.
But according to Prof Hassan Vally, an infectious disease epidemiologist at LaTrobe University, lifting restrictions has given some people false hope that this is the beginning of the end of the pandemic, when it is "only the beginning of the end of restrictions … we still live with coronavirus".
So how can we stay safe while exercising our newfound freedoms? Guardian Australia asked several epidemiologists and healthcare professionals to answer some common questions.
The effectiveness of wearing masks in public has been the topic of much debate. Australian government's advice is that surgical masks are only useful to stop you from spreading coronavirus to another person. In America, where rates of infection are higher, the Centre for Disease Control recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where social distancing is difficult to slow the spread of Covid-19, as well as to prevent those with the virus who may be asymptomatic from spreading it to others.
Unless you have been given medical advice suggesting otherwise, don't bother wearing a mask when going out, according to the University of Newcastle professor of nursing, Brett Mitchell.
This is because if you haven't received training on how to correctly use a mask, wearing one could actually increase your risk of catching the virus.
"The front of the mask will 'catch' pathogens. Every time you adjust or touch your masks, your hands could become contaminated. Everything you then touch could become contaminated," Mitchell says.
You can find the Guardian's guide to correctly using and making masks here.
The Australian government recommends regular hand-washing to prevent the spread of Covid-19, but doesn't suggest people cover their hands by wearing gloves. Mitchell cautions they might give you a false sense of security.
"Gloves are not much different to hands," Mitchell says. "They can transfer pathogens too and also become contaminated when you touch something."
If you do want to want to wear gloves, the Conversation has this guide to removing them properly.
Vally agrees that "while no one is going to be put in jail for hugging someone, the whole reason that these restrictions are being relaxed is on the presumption and the assurance that people are going to be responsible".
According to Vally, that means keeping a 1.5-metre distance from people with whom you don't share a household and making sure you wash your hands a lot.
"The trade-off is you get so see people now, but you still have to follow all of these principles," he says.
That means for now, we will need to embrace alternative ways of greeting each other waving, elbow bumping and "footshaking".
In short, yes. Vally says that "most people have more room outside and the outside air has better circulation and the virus diffuses a bit more easily in the air if you are outside. So I would say it is probably better."
But the most important thing is that we all keep 1.5 metres away from guests, whether we are inside or outside.
Yes. Depending where you live, you could soon be allowed to have upwards of five guests over to your house. But Vally says that doesn't mean you should be having five different people over every night of the week.
"The whole reason we are [only allowing a few visitors at a time] is to limit the amount of contact we have with people in case we have the virus and we are spreading it," Vally says.
"There are two scenarios: there is one person who invites five different people over each night of the week, meaning there are 35 people they could infect, or there is one person who sees the same five or 10 people in total under the new restrictions. If you show common sense and only catch up with closest friends and family, that is going to be better for everyone."
Playgrounds have already started reopening in parts of South Australia. Despite assurances that they will be regularly cleaned, one metropolitan council has suggested parents might like to to wipe down any equipment before their child uses it. NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian suggested parents do the same when the state's playgrounds reopen on 15 May.
But Vally, whose research includes child health, says this is a situation where the cost could outweigh the risks. Washing public gym or play equipment before using it "sounds great in theory but is on the whole impractical," he says.
"The most sensible approach is to make sure your children know not to touch their face, and then wash their hands multiple times in between their play sessions and after they have played."
The same goes for adults: "Just assume [the gym equipment] could be contaminated. Don't touch your face and wash your hands regularly," Vally says.
Thankfully, Vally says that patting a dog – "which is a lovely thing to do" – poses a very low risk of transmission. "I would just encourage people to keep washing their hands. That seems like a reasonable precaution given the chances of a virus sticking to your dog's fur and then sticking to your hands," he says.
Australia's chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, has warned Australians against entering crowded shopping centres, in response to the crowds of people not practising social distancing in Perth's CBD over the Mother's Day weekend.
"If you are arriving at a shopping centre and you find a crowd at an escalator not wanting to practise social distancing or crowded together, don't go in. Leave. Come back later," he said.
At the end of the day, it's up to shopkeepers and managers to ensure patrons are keeping a safe distance.
The University of New South Wales epidemiologist Prof Marylouise McLaws says she personally "will be asking other people to please uphold physical distancing to keep everyone safe".
"People don't see themselves as a potential source of the virus. But remember that the other person you interact with could be a source, so you are also protecting yourself and others from an infection they may have by keeping distance," she says.
"I believe it's quite safe," McLaws says.
Yes, according to McLaws.
"It's a sign of respect: you are showing the other customers and workers in the shop that you are removing your germs before entering their space," she says.
You should also try not to touch your face after you have sanitised your hands.
Prof Mark Stevenson, an epidemiologist and professor of urban transport and public health at Melbourne University, says we need to acknowledge public transport is a necessary resource for many and encourage its use in the long term to promote environmental sustainability.
"But during this pandemic, the public transport system cannot operate as it did before," Stevenson warns. Gone are the days where we can cram into a stuffed 5pm train carriage.
"So I would say, yes, avoid it if you can. But I would also urge employees to think about staggering shift start and end times. And the education department needs to think about starting different schools at different times," he says.
There is no real difference between sitting and standing in terms of risk of infection. But you can keep safe by waiting for another bus, train or tram if yours looks crowded, and sanitising your hands immediately before getting on and after disembarking, Stevenson says.
Yes. Safe Work Australia recommends ride-sharing cars and retail stores avoid using recirculated air-conditioning to avoid regurgitating germs in a small space.
Stevenson agrees that in some instances, it's probably a good idea to ask the bus driver to turn the air-conditioning off.
Yes, use your elbow, wrist or knee, because "touching buttons with your hands and then touching your face is how you can increase transmission quite quickly, Stevenson says.
But always make sure you sanitise your hands when you disembark anyway because it's very hard to navigate public transport without touching something.