Covid-19 commission boss to be paid $267,345, not $500,000, government now says
Prime minister's department previously told Senate that Nev Power would be paid $500,000 for six months' work to cover travel and expenses
The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet has corrected evidence that Scott Morrison's handpicked Covid-19 coordination adviser, the former Fortescue Metals chief executive Nev Power, is being paid $500,000 for six months' work.
In a statement issued late on Wednesday, Morrison's department said Power would be paid $267,345 to cover his expenses as chair of the National Covid-19 Coordination Commission – not $500,000.
Power's remuneration was revealed at a hearing of the Senate inquiry into the management of the coronavirus crisis, where senators focused on whether there were proper processes in place for members of the NCCC to declare any conflicts of interest, given that many are company directors.
It was also revealed during the inquiry that Andrew Liveris, the former chairman and chief executive of the Dow Chemical Company, who has been engaged as a special adviser to the NCCC on manufacturing, was not required to declare potential conflicts in the way that commissioners were.
Morrison established the NCCC in late March, when the health crisis was at its height. The commission has a  broad remit, advising the government on all non-health aspects of its pandemic response.
Terms of reference for its activities were published last week. People familiar with the group's deliberations say it has been championing a significant boost to sovereign capability as Australia absorbs the lessons of the crisis.
Concerns have been raised about the lack of transparency of the group's deliberations, and the absence of a conventional governance framework for a taxpayer-funded enterprise.
Environment groups are also concerned that the commission is promoting gas as central to the economic recovery rather than a mix of fuel sources. In media interviews Power has argued that the cheap supply of energy to business will be critical to Australia's recovery.
The NCCC's chief executive, Peter Harris, told the hearing that the commission had developed a process for members to declare conflicts at the start of every meeting. In addition to the standard declaration, commissioners had to disclose more specific conflicts as they worked through proposals.
Harris said Power had askedhim to develop a protocol: "In the course of the work that is being undertaken by each commissioner, should they encounter something that involves effectively commercially sensitive information which could create a perception that they were being put in an advantageous position, they should draw that matter to his attention, or in his absence, to my attention."
That had happened on one occasion, Harris said, but he declined to say which commissioner had declared the conflict, or disclose the proposal in question. He also pushed back on a request to make the conflict declarations public.
Harris said Liveris – who heads a manufacturing group which Harris said was "appended to the commission" because that group was "set up in an informal manner" – was not subject to the conflict declarations that other commissioners faced. He said he did not believe Liveris was being paid for his advice.
Asked by the Labor senator Murray Watt whether "appendages had to make conflict of interest declarations", Harris relied: "Not as far as the commission process goes, no."
He said the manufacturing group would provide advice to the NCCC "within the next week" but it was unclear how that advice would then progress through government decision making. "That's the part of the process that remains a little opaque … but logically and inevitably you can't take actions in any of that kind of work without going through a cabinet process," Harris said.
Officials from Morrison's department told the hearing that appointments to the NCCC had not been endorsed by cabinet but selected by the prime minister.
Stephanie Foster, an associate secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, said Power had been engaged on a six-month contract worth "around $500,000" which wasn't a salary but an allowance for the businessman to recover his travel and accommodation costs. Foster said one commissioner had declined remuneration and others were engaged on a daily rate of $2,000.
The late statement from the department correcting the earlier evidence said officials made estimates of his expenses when the contract was executed. "In developing and executing Mr Power's contract, the PM&amp;C estimated travel to and from Canberra valued at approximately $6,000 per return trip each week, $350 per night for accommodation and incidentals such as food and taxis, and additional extra expenses set to be incurred from other travel once internal border restrictions ease".
"It is expected that Mr Power will perform his duties as chair of the NCCC for a period of approximately 6 months. This equates to $267,345 (plus GST)".
The statement said remuneration for the other commissioners was "dependent on the part-time arrangements each has entered into with the department". The commissioners are Greg Combet, Jane Halton, Paul Little, Catherine Tanna and David Thodey.
The statement said Combet, Halton and Little worked two days per week, and the approximate value of those contracts was $108,000, paid monthly over the six month period. Tanna worked one day per week, so the approximate value of the contract is $54,000, paid monthly over the six month period. Thodey was not paid a daily rate but his expenses were being met.
Asked to explain the NCCC's work, Harris said the opening phase had been "immediate problem solving", like helping to source personal protective equipment and ensure that container ships were unloaded successfully at a time when global supply chains were disrupted.
He said the commission was now in transition to a second, advisory phase. It was "accepted wisdom" that things would be different after the pandemic, and the NCCC was contributing to that accepted wisdom and providing "broadly speaking, a business perspective".
Harris acknowledged that the membership of the commission did not span all dimensions of the Australian economy but said departmental officials were supplementing its work.
The commission had been "a magnet" for projects, with some proposals before it well known and others newer. Harris said commissioners were expected to "sieve" these to give the government "digestible" advice.