Coronavirus tests brought to Australia by Andrew Forrest at $200m cost to taxpayers not being used
Exclusive: Most states are not using the type of tests purchased by mining magnate's Minderoo Foundation and some have no need of additional tests
Most state and territory governments say they are not using the Covid-19 tests brought to Australia by the billionaire Andrew "Twiggy" Forrest at a $200m cost to taxpayers, which the Guardian can reveal have been sent to the national medical stockpile rather than the coronavirus frontline.
When announcing the purchase last month, the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said the tests would be used to help state public health units test throughout 2020.
But weeks later most states say they are not using the type of tests purchased by Forrest's Minderoo Foundation, which were on-sold at cost to the government. Some say they have no need for any additional tests.
The federal health department has told Guardian Australia the tests bought by Forrest have been added to a strategic reserve.
The mining magnate announced last month that he had secured 10m Covid-19 PCR tests for Australia from the Chinese manufacturer Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI) at a cost of $200m, which would be refunded by the federal government.
Forrest and his philanthropic arm, the Minderoo Foundation, had set about securing the tests for the government at a time of extreme global demand, and when it was unclear whether Australia's crisis would be as severe as in nations like the US and Italy.
During last month's announcement Forrest said the new tests would give governments the confidence to "lift restrictions to rapidly expedite getting the country back to work".
Hunt said the tests would allow public health units to test for the rest of the year.
"What these 10m tests will do is allow our state and territory public health units to be able to test right through 2020, to provide us with the capacity to contain and suppress and defeat the virus," Hunt said.
But Queensland, New South Wales, Western Australia, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory have all told Guardian Australia they are not using the BGI tests. Victoria was the only state to confirm use of BGI tests.
Some states went as far as to say they weren't needed at all. The WA health department said it had sufficient capacity without the BGI equipment.
"PathWest – Western Australia's leading pathology laboratory – is not using the BGI-manufactured Covid-19 PCR testing kits," the department said. "PathWest has capacity and sufficient reagent to provide testing throughout the state without the need to use these tests."
Queensland Health said it had "ample" testing capacity already and wasn't using the BGI tests.
"Queensland Health does not use the BGI Covid-19 test or its operating platform," a spokeswoman said. "Queensland already has ample testing capacity, illustrated by the world leading figures of 137,000 Covid-19 tests since January."
Tasmania and South Australia did not respond by deadline.
The federal government told the Guardian that the BGI tests were acquired for the national medical stockpile, a strategic reserve of medical equipment.
"This acquisition will enable Australia to diversify Covid-19 testing supplies in an area where there are uncertain supply lines and shortages globally," a health department spokesman said.
A spokesman for the Minderoo Foundation said: "It is incredibly important, especially during the challenges the country is facing from Covid-19, that we all pull together and get through this crisis.
"This is why we are working closely with the government to help save lives where we can and provide testing kits to help the government reopen the economy.
"It is why we are also working hard to maintain positive relationships with all parties to manage what is in Australia's national interest."
This month, the Guardian revealed the Australian government had agreed to buy 500,000 Covid-19 antibody test kits – a different type of testing to the PCR tests procured by Forrest – from Promedical, a company run by a convicted rapist and a former business partner of the services minister, Stuart Robert.
Promedical was fined by the TGA last week for falsely claiming to have approvals. The company initially had authority – later rescinded – to supply the "point-of-care" antibody tests made by a Chinese company, Guangzhou Wondfo Biotech.
The government agreed to purchase the Wondfo tests from Promedical, but since that deal collapsed has refused to enter into a replacement deal with other authorised suppliers, on the grounds that point of care tests were no longer needed.
One of those suppliers, Tayler Dental Consulting, told Guardian Australia it remained unclear how any company managed to strike a deal to provide tests.
"We have contacted the various state health departments and sent emails to Greg Hunt to no avail. What do we have to do to get an order? Is there a tender process which we have not seen?"
The health department said: "With increasing supply options now available, the Australian Government is not procuring any additional point of care serology tests at this stage."