Coronavirus in the Pacific: weekly briefing
Covid-19-related developments throughout the Pacific Islands
Infection numbers in the region remain low, with minimal increase. New cases have been recorded in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), bringing the total across the region to 274.
A number of countries have now been provided with GeneXpert testing cartridges by the World Health Oganization (WHO). They will allow for in-country testing and rapid processing of results. However, due to the global demand, there are only small numbers available in most places. For example, Tonga (where there are no confirmed cases) has requested 6,000 cartridges and has received 120.
The idea of including Pacific island countries in a proposed trans-Tasman bubble being mooted by Australia and New Zealand has received a lot of attention among commentators, despite warnings from Australia's prime minister, Scott Morrison, that any relaxation of international border closures is still some way off.
Anne Sherry is to chair an expert panel convened by the Australia New Zealand Leadership Forum to examine what a trans-Tasman bubble might look like. There is no sign of Pacific countries being invited to be part of these discussions at this stage, despite a number of senior leaders from the region indicating that they want their countries to be part in the conversations.
Repatriation concerns are front of mind in a number of Pacific island countries. A small number of flights have been organised in some places to get people home to or from Pacific island countries. Elsewhere, preparations for testing and appropriate quarantine facilities are still being finalised in order to be able to make that happen.
Guam: There have been two new cases this week, bringing the total to 151 (excluding those related to US naval ship Theodore Roosevelt). Some restrictions are being eased, as confidence grows that the outbreak has been brought under control. There have been five deaths.
French Pacific Territories: The number of cases remains at 18 for New Caledonia and 60 for French Polynesia. In New Caledonia there have been calls for the borders to be closed to tourists until the end of the year to prevent a resurgence of Covid-19 infections. Meanwhile in French Polynesia authorities have said that anyone who is repatriated from France will have to go into quarantine for 14 days.
Fiji: With no new cases reported in three weeks, the total of infections in Fiji remains at 18, with no deaths. Fiji Airways has extended its ban on international flights until the end of June. The police have questioned the man who was the first confirmed case in the country amid allegations that he had provided wrong information to health authorities.
Papua New Guinea: The number of confirmed cases remains at eight and authorities have stepped up antibody testing with the aim of testing 12,000 people. As of Monday, five people from three different mine sites had tested positive to the antibody testing. Samples from each of those cases have been sent for PCR testing.
West Papua: The cluster of cases associated with the Freeport mine continues to grow and this was reflected in the rise in cases reported in the province of Papua. The number of reported cases stands at 308 (as at May 11) with 7 deaths.
Vanuatu: The country still has no infections. The director of health has said that there is still work to do to prepare in-country testing and management capacity ahead of repatriating stranded citizens and residents.
Solomon Islands: There are no confirmed cases in the country. Work is ongoing to enhance readiness, including providing for in-country testing with GeneXpert cartridges that have been recently supplied by the WHO.
Samoa: There are no confirmed Covid-19 cases in the country but the economic impacts are being felt severely. Poverty is reported to have "surged" with the collapse of tourism. The industry is reported to provide 12% of employment in Samoa.
Tonga: Tonga has taken delivery of a third testing machine which has been donated by the WHO. There are no confirmed cases in the country and international borders remain closed.
Nauru: This is one of the countries still receiving flights from overseas, although the service is limited to once per fortnight from Brisbane. There are currently around 30 people in quarantine across two sites.
Northern Mariana Islands: Increased levels of contact tracing have led to three new infections being identified. There are now 19 confirmed cases and there have been two deaths.
Papua New Guinea: The Marape government has approved PGK280m (US$8.1m) to address both the health and economic impacts of Covid-19. As the country prepares to ease out of lockdown conditions, the state of emergency controller has transferred a number of powers to provincial authorities, including in Bougainville.
Fiji: Amid government claims of having screened around 700,000 people (around 75% of the population), with no new cases identified, authorities expect to declare the country Covid-free in the near future. The attorney general has called for Fiji to be included in a trans-Tasman travel bubble, citing Fiji's importance as a Pacific hub.
Solomon Islands: Authorities are struggling to ensure compliance with social and economic restrictions and have reported an increased number of breaches among the community. There has also been a noticeable drift of people returning to Honiara from provincial areas, including students to sit school exams and others who are looking for better economic opportunities than are available on outer islands.
Vanuatu: The council of ministers decided to extend the state of emergency for a further 30 days until 12 June as the country works to address multiple disasters including the impacts of tropical cyclone Harold in the north and a major ash-fall on Tanna in the south. Approximately 200 citizens and residents are stranded overseas awaiting details of how the government plans to repatriate them.
Samoa: The government has amended some of the state of emergency orders. Many aspects of daily life have resumed although subject to certain conditions. International borders remain closed. However, the government has announced that there will be four flights between Samoa and New Zealand during May for repatriation purposes only.
Nauru: The government has provided a $A2.5m cash injection to Nauru Airlines to fund redundancy arrangements for 50 Brisbane-based staff. The company does not qualify for the Australian Jobkeeper scheme, which provides payments to stood down staff.
New Caledonia: The government is considering easing restrictions on the sale of alcohol from 1 June although this may be combined with a curfew focused on young people.
Northern Mariana Islands: It was reported on 7 May that community-based contact tracing was being suspended to allow for results to be returned in a more timely manner. The taskforce reported that 2,336 people had been processed during 11 days of testing.
Niue: Despite no infections the government of Niue remains very cautious about exposure to risk and has extended all travel restrictions until August.
In Australia, there are just under 7,000 confirmed cases, but the country is regularly seeing fewer than 20 new cases a day. There has been a spike of cases in the state of Victoria, largely associated with a cluster at an abattoir. The Australian prime minister Scott Morrison announced the plan for easing restrictions and getting people back to work, though this will be executed at the discretion of state premiers, all of whom have announced plans for initial easing of various lockdown rules.
New Zealand has roughly 1,500 confirmed cases and is reporting a 97% recovery rate. Restrictions are being eased in a staged fashion in the hope that economic activity can be restarted without causing an unmanageable rise in new infections.
In PNG, the Post Courier caused something of a stir with the headline "Eighty-Five Year Old from Hanuabada Survives Covid-19". The story it accompanied didn't indicate that Billy Vare had actually contracted the virus but his son says he had given his father plenty of information about how to protect himself from becoming infected.
New Zealand's first priority is obviously Australia. What we did highlight to them is that there needs to be a more nuance approach in terms of dealing with us in the Pacific.
– Ayaz Sayad-Kahiyum, attorney general of Fiji on his country's potential to be included in a trans-Tasman bubble.
In New Zealand and indeed across the world, kava drinking has taken on a new virtual aspect. In New Zealand, strict lockdown measures has meant that kava clubs could not meet in person but many have incorporated Skype and zoom into maintaining the cultural and social connections that these gatherings provide. And this approach has also been adopted by some of the pacific region's most well-traveled activists, academics and policy makers. Unable to congregate physically in Honolulu, Suva or other regional hubs, they have continued their discussions online, aided by a few shells of kava along the way.
Don't want to miss an update? Sign up to receive the Coronavirus in the Pacific weekly briefing into your inbox each week.