'Untruthful': Nathan Cleary handed NRL ban over social distancing breach
Penrith pair Nathan Cleary and Tyrone May have accepted their two-game NRL suspension for social distancing breaches. The Panthers duo on Monday received a two-game ban for being "untruthful" in dealings with the integrity unit during their investigations into the breaches. Cleary was also handed a $30,000 fine.
May, already two games into a separate four-game suspension for intentionally recording an intimate image without consent, also received a $15,000 fine after Penrith conceded there had to be "meaningful consequences" when players and staff fell short of upholding standards of behaviour.
"To that end Panthers supports the sanctions proposed by the NRL in relation to Nathan Cleary and Tyrone May," a Panthers statement read. "Both players have this morning expressed sincere remorse for their actions and confirmed to the club they will accept the proposed sanctions."
The punishments finally end a two-week saga that began with photographs emerging of Cleary with friends at his house during the coronavirus lockdown. He initially explained that the group of friends were over for a short time, before video emerged the next day of him dancing with the same group of friends.
Originally given a $10,000 fine with 60% suspended the NSW State of Origin star and May, his roommate, were dealt a harsher penalty by the governing body. The suspensions comes as a serious blow to the Panthers, given Cleary had been in a rich vein of form as he helped Penrith to start the two-round season unbeaten.
Coach Ivan Cleary, father of Nathan, will now likely be forced to turn to rookie half Matt Burton to partner Jarome Luai when the competition resumes on 28 May. Burton debuted at five-eighth last August, setting up a try in his only game alongside Cleary as the Panthers claimed a 26-20 victory over Cronulla.
The Dubbo junior began last season in Jersey Flegg before rising to first grade, and was man of the match in NSW's under-20s State of Origin win. The Panthers' only other real option outside of playing a utility at No 6 is former Junior Kiwis half Dean Blore. However, the 21-year-old is yet to make his NRL debut and suffered a serious shoulder injury at the end of last year while playing for Samoa.