Coronavirus Australia latest: 11 May at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, and welcome to our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Justine Landis-Hanley bringing you the main stories on Monday 11 May.
Premier Daniel Andrews has announced that from 11.59pm on Tuesday Victorian residents will be allowed up to five visitors in their homes. Andrews stressed that this is "not an invitation to host a dinner party every night of the week" but "about seeing those you need to – if you need to".
Up to 10 people will be allowed to attend weddings, and funerals will be able to have 20 guests if indoors, and 30 if outdoors. Camping in national and state parks is still prohibited, and Andrews said he doesn't expect Airbnbs or hotels will take overnight bookings. But there will be no limit on how far you can travel within the state.
Victoria is the last state to announce a relaxing of coronavirus restrictions, after prime minister Scott Morrison outlined the federal government's national three-step plan to reopen Australia last Friday.
There have been no new cases of Covid-19 in the ACT, the Northern Territory, South Australia, Western Australia or Tasmania in the past 24 hours, deputy chief medical officer Michael Kidd said this afternoon.
This morning, Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk also announced no new cases in the state overnight. NSW reported only one new case of Covid-19 was diagnosed in the past 24 hours, from 5,200 tests. Victoria recorded seven new cases overnight, one of which was connected to the Cedar Meats outbreak.
There are 49 people in hospital from Covid-19 in Australia at the moment, 16 of whom are in intensive care, and 14 who are on ventilators. To date, 6,179 people in the country have recovered from Covid-19.
Kidd has also warned that Australia faces "very serious risks if overcrowding starts to occur", as states and territories ease coronavirus restrictions.
"Covid-19 is still out there in our country," he said. "Each of us needs to continue our strong commitment to maintaining physical distancing of 1.5 metres from other people whenever we are outside of our homes, and that means avoiding crowds whenever possible. If you see a crowd, please go in the other direction."
Kidd also warned Australians against going back into a crowded workplace under the current circumstances.
A Newmarch House resident has become the 17th person to die in the NSW nursing home after being diagnosed with Covid-19.
The resident had previously tested positive, but since returned two negative tests before passing, according to the facility's provider, Anglicare. They are the second infected resident to have tested negative in the days before their death.
Several judges and public servants – including former high court justice Mary Gaudron and former department of prime minister and cabinet secretary Michael Keating – have written to Scott Morrison calling for an end to the government's "undemocratic and unprecedented" parliamentary adjournment.
Parliament will resume for three days this week, but otherwise sittings have been adjourned until August, in response to Covid-19. "Individual ministers have been given the power to allocate multibillion dollar discretionary funds and write the rules for major policy response programs," the letter says. "Parliamentary democracies around the world are continuing to meet, including through virtual means in the UK and Brazil."
Opposition leader Anthony Albanese has warned against a post-coronavirus crisis "snapback" to an economy where workers worry about job insecurity and jobseekers are kept in poverty.
In a speech to the Labor caucus room in Parliament House today, Albanese said he will call on the government to bring forward nation-building infrastructure projects, like high speed rail; restore public sector jobs in areas like Centrelink, Medicare and Veterans Affairs; and increase investment in social and affordable housing.
"It's critical that we are still saying, 'we are all in this together', after the lockdown has come to an end – and not just saying it, living up to that standard," he said.