Counting the human cost of Covid-19: 'Numbers tell a story words can't'
The Guardian's data journalists in the UK, US and Australia explain how they have shone a light on the statistical narrative behind the pandemic, and what they have helped to reveal
Creating data journalism about Covid-19 has felt different. For one thing, the public aren't thinking of the statistics as dry and abstract: they understand how critical they are. People are learning about methodologies and bell curves and logarithmic scales because they're no longer inclined to look away from the screen when they see those words. That means there are also huge opportunities to learn and for people to change their (usually negative!) relationship with numbers.I think we've always had the responsibility to inform without making people feel afraid, alone or sad. At first though, especially here in the US, it felt like not enough people were sufficiently scared. It was fear that was compelling me to stay at home – fear of making other people sick and fear of getting sick myself. So I was trying to create data visualisations that had that emotional resonance too. Illustrations that showed the numbers in a way that communicated the seriousness of this situation. I think that now the need has shifted a little where most people grasp the gravity of the situation. They need information about how to cope.
Data is key in this crisis. It tells us the story of how the virus is spreading, who it affects most and, with political will, it could help pave the way out.
I am fascinated by what is left out of datasets. What we collect and omit tells us something about what we value and overlook as a society. If you don't have data you can't understand a problem or begin to formulate effective public policy to address it. As a journalist the gaps in datasets also give you a sense of what is not understood and should be examined in greater depth. This line of thinking has informed much of our reporting to date.
We have uncovered flaws in the government death toll, shown how the most deprived would be disproportionately affected if parks were closed, revealed BAME people are more at risk of dying from Covid-19, and explored why the poor are twice as likely to die of the virus as the rich.
Work is incredibly demanding at the moment. Very often we're trying to make sense of new information and patchy datasets in a rapidly evolving crisis. So far data has shown us that the virus is certainly not a social leveller, rather it has found the cracks in society and blown them wide open, making long-standing inequalities painfully clear. By inquiring beyond the headline numbers, data can help us understand who the virus is affecting the most so we can forge a fairer society once this has passed.
Counting the human cost of the coronavirus has been one of the greatest challenges faced professionally by journalists since the onset of the pandemic: even the number of deaths is genuinely hard to provide. Part of the problem is that data collection and reporting by the responsible agencies in the UK and elsewhere has been slow to become uniform: ordinarily deaths are collected by statistical bodies with a delay. But deaths due to Covid-19 are of obvious public interest and so the figures need to be circulated. Therefore, for data journalists like myself, much of the past two months has been spent chasing data; figuring out which deaths have and have not been included in various organisations' figures; finding out what we can and cannot compare. As a Guardian journalist you are always focused on reporting the truth. Never has this been more pronounced than in this crisis, where you are hyper-aware that underreporting the figures could cause complacency whereas exaggerating them could cause panic. Some have criticised journalists for not being critical enough while others wrongly, and dangerously, suggest that the figures are exaggerated. But it isn't those people we concern ourselves with: it is getting to the truth and pointing out what we know when we know it. This means that we aren't just putting out a BIG FIGURE and leaving it at that. Instead we are explaining why we think the BIG FIGURE isn't the whole picture. We have faith in our audience's ability to recognise that we may not have all the answers right now but that we are working tirelessly to get them.
Australia is now a success story in terms of its early response to Covid-19, with new cases now often below 20 a day, and far fewer deaths per million people than other countries. How this early success in flattening the curve transitions into an easing of restrictions and the prospect of a second wave remains to be seen.
When the pandemic started worsening in Australia, there were significant challenges with reporting on basic aspects of the outbreak.
Because of the difference in reporting times and methods, getting basic information correct such as the number of cases, deaths, and testing rates required staying on top of information released by nine governments.
Inspired by other projects doing similar work we started tracking these figures internally, and then decided to release the data with a licence allowing reuse. This decision paid off – the data has been used by researchers, private companies and ordinary citizens to analyse and visualise the pandemic's impact on Australia.
Having the data openly accessible also means our figures are constantly being checked, ensuring they are as accurate as possible. This was especially helpful in the early days when significant time pressure would inevitably mean some mistakes – thankfully quickly corrected in response to reader emails.
The response has been phenomenal. The summary page has been one of the most popular pieces we have produced during the pandemic, with 5.4m page views at the time of writing. The data also is used in all our liveblogs to give readers a quick summary of the current situation.
We realised very early on that the story of the coronavirus crisis would benefit hugely from visually led coverage – we published our first visual explainer on the topic in early February, when the overwhelming majority of confirmed cases and deaths were still being reported in China.
From this early stage, our audience was eager to understand the details of the story. We wanted to report on it in a way that was easy to understand and offered clear conclusions. Using maps and charts, we were able to analyse the quantity and speed with which the disease multiplied each day. Our visual trackers evolved as we were able to establish comparisons between countries, put the data into historical context and shed light on different scenarios playing out in different regions.
Visual journalists around the world are coming up with ever more ingenious ways of explaining and contextualising the numbers, from case counts to reproduction numbers, to the tragic death toll of the virus.
"Flatten the curve" is perhaps the best example of a visualisation so well designed and so memorable that it has become a universally understood metaphor for a concept that would require a much lengthier explanation if one tried to convey it through words alone.
Our team is following the lively debate within the data visualisation community closely, and we're constantly working to improve our own coronavirus trackers while experimenting with new formats to communicate the scale of the emergency. We have also experienced a growing interest from our readers in how we make our graphics, with a variety of questions reaching us each day via email and social networks.
As the global pandemic continues, we're using visuals to drive home the dramatic change that the virus has spurred in the way we live and work – from mapping how lockdown measures have slashed global air pollution to quantifying the disastrous impact on the economy.