Sydney harbour master tells Ruby Princess inquiry he 'did not understand' email
NSW Health assessment the cruise ship was 'low risk' introduced 'an unfortunate element' into his decision-making
A New South Wales harbour master has told an inquiry he "did not understand" an email that told him to treat the Ruby Princess "as if it has a positive Covid-19 result" when it came into Sydney Harbour on 18 and 19 March.
Cameron Butchart, who was the duty harbour master on 18 March, said NSW Health's assessment that the ship was "low risk" introduced "an unfortunate element" into his decision-making.
On Friday, the inquiry heard that Butchart received an email saying it was NSW Port Authority policy that if there were Covid-19 tests on board a cruise ship, with results still pending, it should be "treated as if it has a positive result".
However, the email also said that NSW Health had assessed it as "low risk", meaning health teams would not board and assess it, and that passengers could disembark before test results had come back.
NSW Port Authority has said it does not have responsibility for health screening or granting pratique (the approval to dock), but had concerns over the occupational health and safety of sending its employees onto the ship to help it dock.
Emma Fensom, the acting CEO of NSW Port Authority, also told the inquiry she reached out to the Australian Border Force to provide safety advice to her employees for boarding ships with potential coronavirus.
Fensom told the inquiry that in February she emailed the head of the ABF, Michael Outram, to make contact, and was transferred to multiple other border force officers.
The inquiry heard earlier that Butchart had initially cancelled the ship's permission to book on 18 March, and he also offered to "turn [the ship] around" in a conversation with the Australian Border Force.
The commissioner, Bret Walker SC, asked Butchart whether the low-risk label had "introduced an unfortunate element in your decision making", and Butchart said it had.
He said: "I just picked up [from the email that] the ship is low risk, and NSW Health will not be attending. 'Great.'"
It was also revealed on Friday that the inquiry itself had written to the editor-in-chief of the Australian newspaper over an article that could constitute a contempt of the inquiry.
The counsel assisting the inquiry, Richard Beasley SC, opened the fifth day of hearings by revealing that the newspaper may have committed contempt.
He drew attention to an opinion article, published on Thursday, written by the former Daily Telegraph editor David Penberthy, that said the inquiry was "a sham" with a "political end" to protect members of the NSW government.
This came after a NSW Health senior epidemiologist, Kelly Anne-Ressler, cried in the witness box under extensive questioning from Walker on Tuesday.
The Australian's article said it was "debatable whether this woman should have appeared before the inquest at all", given Ressler was not on the NSW Health panel that made the decision over the ship.
Penberthy described the questioning as "an act of state-sponsored bastardry designed to ensure that whatever villains are found in this affair do not inhabit NSW cabinet", and called it "a taxpayer funded show trial aimed at achieving a political end".
Beasley listed 10 reasons why Ressler should have appeared, including that she boarded the ship on the 8th when NSW assessed it, and was in contact with the ship's doctor.
He strongly denied that any member of the NSW government or cabinet had attempted to interfere in the inquiry, and said the senior solicitor for the inquiry has written to the editor of the Australian "as to whether the comments in Penberthy's article might constitute a contempt".
The Australian's editor was requested to respond by noon on Friday.
Walker also addressed comments made by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, who criticised Walker's questioning.
After Ressler's tearful testimony on Tuesday, Morrison told radio station 2GB that he thought Walker's "line of questioning" had been "aggressive" and "a bit out of line".
On Friday, Walker said the media coverage of Morrison's comments "may have created a common misunderstanding that the prime minister made suggestions to me about the conduct of this independent inquiry".
The commissioner said this was not the case, and that Morrison had spoken without "knowledge of [the interview] or a view based on evidence".
"He made clear that he had not seen the proceedings that led up to the unfortunate upset of the witness," Walker said. "It is clear from the prime minister's reported comments that to no extent at all was he suggesting that he had knowledge of or a view based on evidence."
The inquiry also heard that Butchart spoke to NSW Ambulance officers and told them they should treat sick passengers as if they had Covid-19.
Previous hearings heard that the port agent for Carnival Australia, which operates the Ruby Princess, arranged for two ambulances to immediately transfer two sick passengers to Royal Prince Alfred hospital when it docked on 19 March.
One of those passengers later tested positive for Covid-19 and died.
In a transcript of a call to an ambulance officer, Peter Dilonardo, just after midnight on 19 March, Butchart said: "Can you guys just treat it as corona … We will put our pilot on, we will tell our pilot to wear all the PPE."
In other parts of the exchange, Butchart told Dilonardo: "This could be front page news in the morning."
"It's such a political thing at the moment … so we've got to be mindful," Dilonardo replied.
In the transcript tendered to the inquiry, Dilonardo told Butchart: "Unless we know they're cleared, they're not positive for it, we treat everybody the same as if they actually have it. So we're to use all the universal precautions."
Butchart replied: "Oh well, they're going treat as [if] it's corona then. Cause this will be if it is a corona, then it'll be you know tomorrow Ruby Princess [sic]".
Dilonardo: "Yeah like all the others have been."
Butchart: "It's the same. It's the sister ship is [sic] the one that went up in Japan."
Dilonardo: "Oh OK. Oh geez."
Butchart: "That was the Diamond Princess, this is the Ruby Princess."
Dilonardo: "Bloody hell. I mean it's so political at the moment, it's such a hot topic."
Butchart: "And they've got 20 people in isolation."
The inquiry continues.