Artists find fans and creative outlet as they flock towards crowdfunding sites
Coronavirus crisis has forced musicians and others to adapt, says founder of platform
Musicians, artists and writers have turned to crowdfunding sites to make up for lost opportunities in lockdown, and their audiences have followed them, leading to a rise in contributions through platforms such as Patreon.
Since mid-March more than 70,000 extra creators have joined Patreon, which allows fans to give monthly payments to artists in exchange for exclusive content or simply out of a desire to support someone whose work they appreciate.
The artistic influx has been matched by an equally large increase in supporters – or "patrons", as the site calls them – the number of whom is up 25% month on month. Over the same period, spending by existing patrons has increased by 75%.
Jack Conte, the site's founder, said that the coronavirus crisis was particularly acute for musicians, who have joined the platform at almost three times their normal rate.
"[Live music group] AEG cancelled all tours, LiveNation cancelled all tours – or, most tours – so a lot of musicians are entering a world where, for the next year, two years, who knows, their primary revenue stream is either gone or greatly decreased," he said.
"To be suddenly faced with that over the course of two months, I think we're seeing people asking how they can adapt their business."
Conte, who is also one half of the band Pomplamoose, said other creative industries were facing similar shocks. "Podcasters, illustrators, they've also been selling their work at conventions or performing in front of crowds. So they're having to replace their income with another stream," he said.
The site has also expanded its definition of "creators" to cope with demand: more than 2,000 small businesses have signed up this year, including restaurants, record stores and board game shops. "We built Patreon to be an open, flexible platform," Conte said. "It's a tool. Why shouldn't we open it up to people who find utility in it?"
The coronavirus pandemic has also led to a surge in interest in charity platforms. GoFundMe's chief executive. Tim Cadogan, said the first wave of interest was around medical workers, PPE and equipment.
"That then is shifting to small businesses, businesses and their employees. And that then is shifting deeper into the areas like food security, rent relief, and then starting to touch on the more hidden factors like mental health," he told Marketplace in late April.
But Conte insisted Patreon was about more than just charity, even if some patrons sigd up with more interest in the support they provide than the rewards they get.
"The interesting thing about membership is that it's, by its nature, a very emotional transaction. It's a tie to an artist. It feels like voting with your dollars: I'm voting with my spending, voting for the creator. It's form of identity, saying: 'This is what I stand for, I'm a patron of this person because I believe in what they're doing.' It's an emotional thing, it comes from the heart more than the pocketbook."
The rise in use has not protected Patreon from the wider economic climate. The company laid off 30 employees in April, more than a tenth of staff, in a move that Conte said was about setting up the company in a way that could help it "weather the downturn".
However, he was optimistic about the future, not only for his company but for the creative sector in general. "People were saying seven years ago: 'I don't know if people are going to pay for content, content is free.' Well, the paid internet is here. You can say something, make something, and be rewarded for it by the people you're speaking to."
Virtual Pub Quiz
Jay Flynn started VPQ in March as a way to support the NHS and keep people in his local area entertained. Since then it has ballooned, drawing 150,000 viewers each week on YouTube, and it has raised more than £130,000 for charity. Flynn's 4,000 patrons give anywhere from £3 to £25 a month for perks such as exclusive quizzes and the ability to ask guest questions
Ben Folds
The veteran indie rocker launched his LOCKDOWN2020 livestreams when he got stuck in Australia as his tour was about to start. With just one tier available, at $10 a month, his 1,000 patrons get access to the weekly performances, as well as monthly downloads and songwriting classes.
The London Writer's Salon
A small collective of writers based in the UK capital, the salon arranges interviews, masterclasses and support for those who want to work with a community of like-minded authors. The salon's 45 patrons can give £5 to £145, with rewards ranging from public thanks to one-on-one mentoring programmes.