Mem Fox on fear, creativity and Covid-19: 'What if I die with the story unfinished?'
After a dangerous illness the children's author is high-risk for coronavirus, but she insists there's a positive side to lockdown
In some ways, life for Mem Fox under coronavirus is not terribly different from life before the pandemic. It's largely "same, same", the children's author says. "But there is one difference, and that's terror."
She was sick last year, in hospital for eight days with paraflu. She was too weak to read. She couldn't hold a book. Hospital staff would be kitted out in PPE when treating her, and visitors needed to keep their distance. If she took a phone call from a friend, she would need three hours to recover. She just couldn't breathe.
She did recover. But as coronavirus casts a pall over all things, she is aware she is in the highest level of the danger zone. Recently ill, 74 years old and a severe asthmatic. She feels the terror in her body – something like cold sweats and slight panic attacks. She wonders sometimes whether she will survive the coming winter.
But within that terror – and boredom, as she lay in her hospital bed unable even to queue up podcasts – she began to write a story in her head.
"Day after day I would write it, rethink certain phases then rewrite," Fox tells Guardian Australia. As she got better, she asked her husband tobuy a pad of yellow paper, a rubber, a sharpener and six 4B pencils. "The lead is so soft, it's lovely to write with."
One day, a specialist came into her room to find Fox on a bed covered with yellow pages of drafting, the right sleeve of her nightie dirty from rubber crumbs. She was appalled to see Fox working but the author replied that, actually, she was in a state of zen. The forced stillness had brought her to another planet.
She worked through to draft 10, putting the story down before the end of the year. And then she thought: "Oh my God, what if I die with that story unfinished?" So she militantly set aside time to work on it further. "And because I had the terror and the tension, I was able to be creative again. I finished it."
The book has been accepted but it is unlikely to be published until 2023. Fox had two thoughts: one, that it may be posthumous but at least it got done. The second was that 2023 would mark the 40th anniversary of her first book, Possum Magic – one of the best-loved in Australian children's literature.
Fox's mother would disapprove of her "skiting" but the author has been wondering why it is she has been so successful. Not every book has been a bestseller, but enough of them have found places in the homes and languages of children in Australia and beyond. The difference, she has decided, is a sense of rhythm. "I can't bring it down to anything else."
Children's books are for reading aloud. Not a single word, not a beat, can be off-kilter. Koala Lou took two years and 49 drafts to complete. Her latest book, The Tiny Star, took five years.
"The problem is that you get the idea, you know the story, maybe you've got the characters. Putting those things together in a first draft, that's simple," she says. "But five years later you're still writing a book of 250 words or something. Because, in [The Tiny Star] in particular, every single word had to be in the right place. You couldn't have a syllable in the wrong place."
There is another component, she thinks, that has rendered her stories so popular.
"It's also understanding that children are intelligent, and that they've got a sense of humour, and they have deeply felt emotions, even at a young age," she says. "They are super human beings, little kids."
And as someone who has been talking to children for generations, what does Fox think of childhood under coronavirus?
"The positive side of it is massive," she says. "It's the weirdest thing."
While the physical side of restrictions can be hard for young children, Fox finds cause for much hope – even enjoyment – in the upheaval. Families spending entire days together, with fathers, particularly, spending much more time at home. No scuttling, pinball-like, between scheduled activities. In some ways, for the lucky families, it's a gift.
"I think that children must have been able to find a sense of calm," she says. "Everything's cancelled. There's no sport. There's no outside school activity. There's no urgency any more. It must be wonderful for them."
The lockdown, says the former associate professor of literary studies, is a huge opportunity for literacy. Fox defends teachers but is no fan of contemporary literacy teaching. And while not all children are or will be read to, for those who are, she says, this lockdown could mean they read with their loved ones far more than in the past. "This is an inoculation against illiteracy!"
And then there's the magic. At the end of the day, after whatever calm or chaos has preceded it, something happens, she says, when an adult sits down with a child to read.
"You almost see the changing shape of the child when those familiar words begin." And not just for the child: "The balloon of tension in a parent just goes away. It just goes down to nothing. It's magical."
And if coronavirus means there are more moments like that, in more households, she says, "It's not all been bad."