Australian authorities reveal alleged fraud of early access to superannuation
Covid-19 Senate inquiry hears 'sophisticated' fraudulent activity may have deprived up to 150 people of retirement savings
Government authorities have detected a "sophisticated" alleged fraud of early access to superannuation, which may have deprived up to 150 Australians of $120,000 of retirement savings.
On Thursday, Treasury, the tax office and the Australian federal police fronted the Covid-19 Senate inquiry to discuss the integrity of $194bn in three tranches of stimulus.
The Australian Taxation Office commissioner, Chris Jordan, confirmed "some limited fraudulent activity has been identified and immediately acted upon" in relation to impersonation to defraud workers of retirement savings.
The AFP commissioner, Reece Kershaw, said the alleged fraud was the result of "an intrusion into a third party", which was not a government agency. He accepted that organised crime and offshore actors were "possibilities" the AFP was investigating.
Kershaw said the alleged fraud was detected by financial intelligence agency Austrac, which informed the ATO, resulting in a referral to the AFP on 1 May.
Kershaw said the AFP had executed five search warrants and frozen $120,000 in bank accounts but there had been no arrests.
A brief went to Morrison government ministers on 6 May, but no directions to improve the integrity of the program have been made.
Jeremy Hirschhorn, the ATO's second commissioner, said ministers had "exhorted us to do our best" but had not suggested specific responses.
The committee heard that 1.1 million Australians have applied for access to superannuation, with $9.4bn of retirement savings approved for early release.
The AFP has established Taskforce Iris to investigate whether organised crime or others are seeking to defraud Covid-19 economic response measures.
In his opening statement, Kershaw said that a western Sydney man had been arrested for "allegedly submitting claims for a range of government benefits, designed to assist members of the community affected by Covid-19 and bushfires".
"He used assumed 11 identities and 53 fictitious identities to submit 68 claims for government benefits … [the] total value of claims exceeded $70,000."
Kershaw said the man had been charged with "a range of commonwealth offences, including obtaining a financial advantage by deception".
Kershaw said the taskforce had received seven referrals, including the one that resulted in charges, three finalised matters and three currently under investigation, including one matter involving the $1,500 fortnightly jobkeeper payment.
"The reason we've created that taskforce is we anticipate more referrals," he said.
Earlier, Jordan said "whenever cash is given out you'll get an element of criminality and attempts to access that cash".
Kershaw told the committee that certain categories of crime had increased during the Covid-19 crisis, including the prevalence of child abuse material on the dark web, burglaries and family violence. However, homicides were down and drug prices had increased, a sign of decreased supply.
Asked about the progress of an investigation into AFP recruits who broke social distancing rules, Kershaw revealed that 76 recruits were investigated and 53 were sanctioned, including two who were given show cause notices.
"They've had the cane well and truly, and beyond that," he said.
Jenny Wilkinson, Treasury's deputy secretary of the fiscal group, told the committee that more than $15bn of stimulus has already been paid including:
Jobseeker payments with the coronavirus supplement.
$5.2bn in $750 payments to households.
$7.5bn for cashflow boost to small businesses.
$2.4bn of jobkeeper wage subsidies.
Wilkinson said that 768,000 employers had registered for jobkeeper, covering up to 5 million workers.
She said the "demand-driven" program was broadly on track to reach Treasury's estimates of 6 million workers, and noted that the deadline to receive payments for April had been extended to 31 May.
ATO officials said that its hotline for alleged jobkeeper fraud had received 1,160 tip-offs with a further 2,000 "calls of concern".