Newmarch House: regulator threatens to shut down coronavirus-hit Sydney aged care home
Anglicare told it must show it has addressed risk to residents or face losing its licence
The aged-care regulator has threatened to revoke the operating licence of Newmarch House, the western Sydney aged-care facility where 16 residents have died of Covid-19, over what it views as an "immediate and severe risk to the health, safety and wellbeing" of residents.
On Wednesday afternoon the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission issued a notice to Anglicare, Newmarch's operator, saying it must demonstrate "the serious risk to care recipients at the service has been effectively addressed" and improve its communication with residents' families or risk the revocation sanction.
Anglicare must also agree to appoint an independent adviser chosen by ACQSC and follow any recommendations the adviser made, and provide regular reporting to the commission.
The operator must provide written agreement to ACQSC by 5pm on Thursday that it will take the required actions in order to continue operating Newmarch House.
"The Covid-19 outbreak at Newmarch House in Western Sydney during this pandemic has been one of the most devastating in Australia, with 16 residents having lost their lives to the virus," said Janet Anderson, the aged care quality and safety commissioner. "This is a tragic situation, and the anxiety and grief experienced by residents, their family members and staff has had an impact on all Australians."
In its notice to agree letter, ACQSC raised concern about Anglicare's "response to the outbreak and lack of suitable processes and systems in order to control transmission of the virus", as well as complaints received by residents and their families about a lack of information.
"The commission has identified that there is an immediate and severe risk to the health, safety and wellbeing of care recipients at the service," it said.
After a part-time carer worked six shifts with mild symptoms before being diagnosed with coronavirus on 11 April, more than 60 staff and residents contracted Covid-19, with the 16th death of a resident announced on Tuesday.
Since the outbreak was declared, 35 surge staff from the private firm Aspen Medical have entered the home, with allegations levelled against both Newmarch and Aspen carers of breaches of personal protective equipment protocol.
Grant Millard, the chief executive of Anglicare, indicated that he would agree to take the required action.
"We acknowledge the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission have, this afternoon, taken regulatory action, including appointing an independent adviser to provide additional support to Newmarch House," he said.
"Since the outbreak, we have had generous support of providers in the Aged Care sector, including Commonwealth and NSW Governments, and various agencies.
"While the outbreak at Newmarch House has proved very challenging for all involved, the situation has substantially improved. We will continue to collaborate with key stakeholders as we work through the continuing challenges in the coming weeks."
Wednesday marks the third time the regulator has intervened at Newmarch, but this action most seriously threatens its future operations.
The aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, said: "The action by the Commissioner today will require high level co-ordinating support to Anglicare and Newmarch to ensure all elements of the operations on site are clearly coordinated and managed."
Earlier on Wednesday, the aged care royal commissioners Tony Pagone and Lynelle Briggs announced that the inquiry would specifically look at "the lessons from what has happened at Newmarch House".
The expansion of the royal commission came after Labor's aged care spokeswoman, Julie Collins, renewed her calls for the inquiry to examine Newmarch on Wednesday, in response to Guardian Australia's report that Aspen Medical clinicians who boarded the Ruby Princess cruise ship to test stranded crew for Covid-19 were sent into Newmarch just days later.
According to Aspen Medical, two surge staff clinicians who conducted screening and testing of crew onboard the Ruby Princess when it was stuck off the coast of Port Kembla, near Wollongong, later worked a shift inside Newmarch House.
The private staff worked on the cruise ship until it departed Port Kembla on 23 April, with two of the clinicians, who had tested negative for Covid-19, later working a shift at Newmarch on 25 April.
On Monday Aspen complied with a request to stand down a member of its surge staff after Anglicare accused the carer of "breaches of the PPE protocol".
The Guardian does not suggest that the two Aspen clinicians who worked on both the Ruby Princess and at Newmarch House breached any PPE protocol, nor that they were personally responsible for any further spread of the virus at the aged-care facility.