Australian 'healing church' defends bleach sales after US coronavirus cure claims
Exclusive: Group claims it should be allowed to promote its Miracle Mineral Solution on freedom of religion grounds
Representatives of an international group that calls itself a "healing church" and promotes industrial bleach as a cure for coronavirus say they should be allowed to continue selling the potentially toxic "miracle" solution in Australia on religious freedom grounds.
The ABC reported on Tuesday the Australian chapter of the Genesis II Church of Health and Healing is selling chlorine dioxide – marketed as Miracle Mineral Solution – online.
The website selling the product in Australia states the solution is the formulation "approved" by church founder, Jim Humble, who has published claims that people with Covid-19 recovered after taking MMS.
Guardian Australia spoke with an Australian representative of the church's MMS Australia Foundation, which is selling the solution online and operates from an address in Hervey Bay, Queensland. The man would not identify himself due to "hate mail and hate phone calls" received in recent days.
"Do you go into the Catholic church and question them about the wine or the bread that they serve in the Eucharist? No, so why doesn't the world leave us alone?" he said.
"These are our sacraments and we should be free to use it and teach other people to use it."
It has been revealed that Genesis II church US leader, Mark Grenon, wrote to Donald Trump just days before the US president claimed disinfectant could be a coronavirus cure.
The letter stated that chlorine dioxide – a powerful bleach used in industrial processes such as textile manufacturing that can have fatal side-effects when drunk – is "a wonderful detox that can kill 99% of the pathogens in the body". He added that it "can rid the body of Covid-19".
The group has previously claimed the bleach can be used to treat diseases including cancer, HIV/Aids, asthma, ­autism and Ebola.
Health authorities in the US and Australia have previously warned that MMS poses a "serious health risk if consumed by humans" and was not approved for any therapeutic use. The product has been linked to hospitalisations in several Australian states. Dr Tony Bartone, president of the Australian Medical Association, called for the product to be banned in 2014 ahead of a visit to Melbourne by Humble.
The church representative said chlorine dioxide was commonly used for water purification, and that bottles were clearly labelled poison and carried appropriate disclaimers. But he conceded that in large enough doses, the solution could be fatal.
"Here is the big lie which the ABC could not resist perpetuating. The big bleach lie. You take enough water, you drink enough water, you kill yourself. You kill yourself by drinking enough water.
"Similarly we kill ourself by taking our sacrament full strength. You take two maybe three drops and you dilute it in a lot of water.
"Ask yourself, who is doing all this in the background, who is trying to sink us? There are dark forces against us. There are spiritual dark forces trying to get a hold of us. We are under assault. We are inundated with hate phone calls and hate mail."
A complaint to the Therapeutic Goods Administration, lodged by public health expert Ken Harvey, urges immediate action against the church and its MMS Australia website, and calls for "substantial fines".
The church's MMS Australia website includes a disclaimer that "we do not list or sell any therapeutic goods, as defined by legislation, and any apparent mention or reference to same is inadvertent and coincidental".
"Our products, their descriptions and other information posted here are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent disease, and any apparent reference to same is inadvertent and purely coincidental. Anyone seeking medical products, should consult their physician."
Harvey's complaint says the site also: "links to (and thus endorses) a number of videos, testimonials, protocols and other material invoking Jim Humble who alleges that MMS, 'has proven to restore partial or full health to hundreds of thousands of people suffering from a wide range of diseases.
"These include prohibited representations such as Covid-19, cancer, coronary heart disease, depression and multiple sclerosis."
The Therapeutic Goods Administration does not typically regulate water purification products, but has previously published warnings about MMS out of concern that some people are using the solution for therapeutic purposes.
It warns that using the solution for purposes other than water purification, or at higher concentrations, can cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and severe dehydration.