Essential poll: two-thirds of Australians back aged-care homes on Covid-19 visitor bans
The public supports cautious approach during the coronavirus crisis after Scott Morrison's warning to open up
Two-thirds of Australians back the right of aged-care homes to ban visitors with limited exceptions for compassionate reasons, according to a new poll.
The Essential poll is a strong sign of public support for a precautionary approach on Covid-19 in aged care and comes as the sector draws up a code for visits in response to Scott Morrison's warning to open up or face tough new rules.
The national cabinet has set limits on the number of visitors to residents in aged care, but on 24 April Morrison said it was "not OK" that some centres had opted for tougher restrictions leaving "people stuck in their rooms, not being able to be visited by their loved ones and carers".
The poll of 1,093 respondents found that 69% supported "aged care homes preventing visitors (with exemptions for compassionate reasons and video calls) to reduce the risk to older people of being exposed to Covid-19". That included 37% who strongly support the statement and 32% who "somewhat support" it.
Just 10% opposed the right of aged-care homes to prevent visits, with the rest either neutral (17%) or unsure (4%).
Women were more likely to support visitor bans compared with men, but both recorded majority support, 72% and 66% respectively.
Bans were backed by people aged 55 and over (70%), those aged 35-54 (71%) and 18-34 year olds (66%).
Newmarch House, an aged-care home in western Sydney, has recorded 16 coronavirus deaths, due to infections which NSW Health has suggested could have been caused by possible breaches of safety protocol "amongst particularly the staff".
The Aged and Community Services Australia chief executive, Patricia Sparrow, said Australia "can be proud of our management of Covid-19 but we can't get blasé about aged care because this is where our most vulnerable people live".
Sparrow said the "first priority" of providers was to protect older people in care, and as a result many had "made difficult decisions to prevent visitors because visitors increase the chance of exposure to Covid-19".
"Aged care, government and consumer peaks are working hard to negotiate consistent guidelines that will prevent the tragic tsunami of outbreaks we've seen in aged care homes overseas," she said.
"The UK estimates around 20% of their homes have outbreaks. In Belgium, Italy, Spain, Norway, Canada and more – aged care accounts for more than 50% of all coronavirus deaths."
Under the proposed visitor access code drafted by peak aged-care bodies, the providers must "actively facilitate connections between residents and family, families of choice and friends".
The code suggests that dying residents should be allowed "in-person visits from a small number of loved ones on a regular basis" while "erring on the side of compassion".
Visitors who have "a clearly established pattern of involvement in providing a resident's care and support … must also be facilitated", it said.
The code allows providers to impose restrictions on "all other visitors" including limits on the length of a visit, additional procedures such as booking systems, and requiring visits occur at windows, balconies, gates or gardens.
"All visitors must not visit aged care facilities if they have any cold/flu or other Covid-19 symptoms."
Visitors must also submit to minimum requirements including screening questions, demonstrating an up-to-date flu vaccination, temperature checks, wearing personal protecting equipment and sanitising hands.
Sparrow said "in most cases, visitors are understanding of the restrictions and we continue to ask for that understanding".
"We are also appealing to all Australians to do everything possible to protect older people and to reach out to support them by picking up the phone."