Private medical staff who worked on Ruby Princess were sent into Newmarch House
Exclusive: Aspen Medical clinicians who tested cruise ship crew for coronavirus later worked in aged-care home where 16 people have died
Private medical responders who boarded the Ruby Princess cruise ship to test stranded crew for Covid-19 were sent into a Sydney nursing home suffering its own deadly outbreak of the virus just days later.
The Guardian can confirm that two Aspen Medical surge staff clinicians who conducted screening and testing of crew onboard the Ruby Princess when it was stuck off the coast of Port Kembla, near Wollongong, later worked a shift inside the Newmarch House aged-care facility.
Aspen Medical staff worked on the cruise ship until it departed Port Kembla on 23 April, with two of the clinicians, who had tested negative for Covid-19, later working a shift at Newmarch on 25 April.
The news comes as Aspen complied with a request to stand down a member of its surge staff on Monday after Newmarch's operator, Anglicare, accused the carer of "breaches of the PPE [Personal Protective Equipment] protocol".
The Guardian does not suggest that the two Aspen clinicians who worked on both the Ruby Princess and at Newmarch House breached any PPE protocol, nor that they were personally responsible for any further spread of the virus at the aged-care facility.
On Tuesday afternoon, Anglicare announced the 16th resident death at Newmarch House, less than a month after a part-time worker was diagnosed with the first case related to the facility on 11 April. Since then, more than 60 staff and residents have contracted Covid-19, with a NSW Health review into subsequent infection last week triggering a daily Covid-19 testing regime for all Newmarch staff. Aspen has been providing support to Newmarch since 20 April.
Government health advice is for close contacts of a confirmed Covid-19 case to self-isolate for 14 days, as symptoms take days to manifest, however this requirement is not extended to workers who deal with confirmed cases while wearing full PPE.
A spokesman for Aspen Medical, which has been contracted by the federal government to provide 35 staff at Newmarch House, said both of the workers who had boarded the Ruby Princess tested negative for Covid-19 before being deployed to the aged-care home.
"Both are experienced clinicians with significant experience in infection control and were in full PPE at all times whilst at Newmarch House," the spokesman said.
In response to an Aspen worker being stood down for an alleged breach of personal protective equipment protocol, the Aspen spokesman told the Guardian it was still waiting to see an incident report from Anglicare, after which it would investigate the matter internally.
Aspen Medical is an Australian-based private medical provider that has been used by the government to provide consultation on projects, and was previously contracted to set up Ebola clinics and hospitals in countries with fledgling medical systems, including in Sierra Leone and Iraq.
When asked by the Guardian if it was aware that members of the surge staff working inside its facility had worked on the Ruby Princess days earlier, an Anglicare spokesman said "we've had contractors in [Aspen] and I don't know where they've come from ... it's for Aspen to answer for".
The NSW opposition leader, Jodi McKay, told the Guardian the revelation reinforced her view that the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, "should have used the extraordinary powers he has under state laws to seize control of this situation [at Newmarch] weeks ago".
"This has been an utterly unacceptable performance from the minister," McKay said.
Speaking on the alleged breach of PPE by an Aspen employee, the federal aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, told the Guardian: "Aspen Medical was engaged (at Newmarch) because it has national and international experience with urgent and complex health system response and retrieval arrangements, and was able to demonstrate an ability to provide suitably experienced staff and response capacity.
"Clearly we all expect appropriate protocols are followed ... It is really disappointing that aged care workers have been singled out for blame," Colbeck said.
Peter Collignon, a professor of infectious diseases at the Australian National University, said the transfer of workers between outbreaks posed a low risk of spreading the infection "if they wear the appropriate PPE and have used it properly".
Joseph Ibrahim, a professor of forensic medicine and head of the health law and ageing research unit at Monash University, said some breaches of PPE were difficult to avoid among aged-care staff.
He explained PPE has to be discarded and new equipment worn every time a carer enters or leaves a different resident's room, and that strict hand-cleaning protocols were required several times when taking items such as gloves, masks and gowns off.
"It's not as straightforward as everyone thinks. Let's say there's 30 staff, and they've got to see a resident three times a day. That means they have to put on and take off PPE 90 times, which is 180 conditions of use. So if they follow it right 90% of the time, then there's still 18 breaches."
"Staff aren't trained to do this, they shouldn't be criticised. They're now being asked to have a level of attention to detail regarding infection control that you would normally see in a highly specialised hospital unit, what you'd normally see with oncology patients."