ACTU says ME Bank should not limit customers from drawing down on home loans
Bank is owned by union and employer-controlled super funds but an ACTU spokesman described move as 'unacceptable'
Australia's peak union body has demanded ME Bank, which is owned by union and employer-controlled super funds, walk back its decision to suddenly slash the amount tens of thousands of customers could redraw from their home loans.
"It's clearly unacceptable for a bank to create this level of uncertainty and stress during a crisis which is causing financial hardship for millions of Australians," an ACTU spokesman said.
"We have made this clear to them and we trust ME will rectify the situation."
It is understood the ACTU, which is believed to receive significant sponsorship income from ME Bank, has been in close contact with the bank over the weekend, pressing for a solution.
Customers last week complained the change reduced the amount they could draw down on their home loans by thousands of dollars – money some said they urgently needed due to the coronavirus crisis.
ME Bank's move also took some customers by surprise because they received letters about it that are dated before the decision but which borrowers said they only received after it had already happened.
The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (Apra) has asked ME Bank to explain what happened in order to determine whether it raises prudential regulation issues.
"We have written proactively to Apra to provide pertinent information on the redraw adjustments," an ME Bank spokesman said.
"We have not received in writing any inquiry from Apra in relation to the redraw adjustments."
Some of the 26 industry super funds that own ME Bank have also demanded the bank resolve the issue.
Gerard Noonan, the chairman of ME Bank shareholder Media Super, told Guardian Australia the bank shouldn't have made the change during the coronavirus crisis.
He said Media Super has been talking to ME Bank about the issue.
"We're kind of a bit nonplussed that this has emerged out of left field when it [ME Bank] has been a better performer," he said.
The anger from super funds and unions comes despite efforts by ME Bank to downplay the issue with its key stakeholders over the weekend.
In an email sent to unions and super funds on Saturday and obtained by Guardian Australia, the bank's head of network distribution, Jim Giannakopoulos, said that news articles on the issue "continue to report some inaccuracies".
An ME Bank spokesman said this was not a reference to Guardian Australia's report on the issue on Friday.
In his email, Giannakopoulos repeated the bank's earlier statements that ME Bank reduced redraw amounts to stop customers falling behind on their loan repayments.
"No money has been removed from customer accounts," he said.
"We understand that the change has caused concern to some customers, particularly in the current environment."
He said the bank had shifted staff to a call centre to deal with angry customers.
The bank's spokesman said it had "close to tripled our capacity to manage calls to customers".
"We have been speaking directly with customers affected by this change and have been doing this since after the first change was enacted, on 25 April 2020," he said.
Guardian Australia understands that the bank has already told some customers that their entire redraw amount will be restored.
The bank's spokesman said assistance available to customers included extending the length of the loan, refinancing or topping up the loan, a six-month deferment of repayments or extending additional credit.
Victorian Liberal MP Tim Wilson has said he will ask ME Bank if it was "providing loans to industry funds to address the liquidity issues and as a consequence they need to make money from peoples' offset accounts to maintain its prudential risk profile".
However, Noonan dismissed any link between ME Bank's move and early super withdrawals allowed under the government's coronavirus support package that have put some funds under stress.
"It's laughable that this should be linked to the liquidity of super funds," he said.
He said Media Super had received about $33m in early withdrawal requests and had about $400m in cash on hand.
ME Bank has been contacted for comment.