Scott Morrison says it's time to get Australians back to work after coronavirus shutdown
As national cabinet prepares to relax restrictions the prime minister warns of an uptick in Covid-19 infections
Scott Morrison has declared Australia has flattened the curve of coronavirus infections, so now the country must flatten the curve of unemployment – although he acknowledged the imminent easing of restrictions will not be uniform.
With some economic activity set to resume later this week, the prime minister has also warned Australians to brace for an uptick in Covid-19 infections.
In comments after Tuesday's national cabinet meeting, Morrison said hundreds of thousands of Australians had been protected through lockdowns and social distancing restrictions implemented over the past two months.
"Thousands of Australian lives have been saved, when you look at the experience of how coronavirus has affected so many countries around the world," the prime minister said.
"But we now need to get a million Australians back to work. That is the curve we need to address."
Tuesday's national cabinet deliberation focused predominantly on a relaxation of restrictions expected to be unveiled on Friday. Materials have also been prepared for business to guide employers in how to maintain Covid-safe workplaces.
The chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, told reporters workplaces would need to examine practices such as hot desking. He said employers could consider things like staggering the daily start and finish time to encourage social distancing.
"We don't want everybody crowding on public transport at the same time," Murphy said on Tuesday. "We don't want everyone crowding in the lifts at the beginning of the day and the end of the day."
Morrison said another national cabinet meeting this Friday would attempt to ensure a consistent approach to reopening the economy across the states and territories. But he signalled the next steps were unlikely to be uniform.
The prime minister said throughout the Covid-19 crisis there had always been different timetables and different "nuances" between the jurisdictions, and "ultimately, each state and territory are the arbiters of their own position".
Morrison said it would be up to premiers and chief ministers to explain to residents in their jurisdiction why a restriction was remaining in place if it was being removed elsewhere. "At the end of the day, every premier, every chief minister has to stand in front of their state and justify the decisions that they're taking in terms of the extent of the restrictions that are in place – the trade-off that they're making between people having jobs and the impact on the containment of the coronavirus".
The prime minister and the chief medical officer warned Australians to expect an uptick in infections once restrictions were eased. But both said the period of lockdowns had helped governments to buy time to fortify the health system.
Morrison said the capacity of intensive care had been tripled over the past couple of months, and Australia had boosted its stockpile of personal protective equipment and respirators.
He said five million people had now downloaded the tracing app CovidSafe. "We've built these protections over the last six weeks and more, and that means that we're in a much stronger position to resist and deal with any increase in cases."
While obvious differences remain between Canberra and some states about how fast to go with easing restrictions, the Morrison government has been attempting to prepare the ground all week for transitioning away from lockdowns.
On Tuesday, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, told the National Press Club health restrictions were resulting in a reduction in economic activity worth $4bn per week. The Reserve Bank on Tuesday said it was anticipating unemployment would peak at 10% in the coming months, and persist at 7% by the end of next year.
Morrison on Tuesday emphasised the high fiscal cost of the measures taken to cushion the economic shock associated with the pandemic. He said one million claims had been processed for the jobseeker payment, and around five million Australians would claim the wage subsidy jobkeeper. He said 384,000 businesses were now accessing around $7bn in cashflow assistance. He said the social distancing restrictions had led to the loss of 708,000 jobs.
New polling this week indicates that Australians are becoming more comfortable about winding back restrictions.
But as Morrison and Frydenberg made the case for return to work, the Australian Council of Trade Unions secretary, Sally McManus, warned employers that workplaces could not go "back to business as usual, because that risks a big second wave".
The ACTU wants stronger rules allowing state and territory regulators and work health and safety representatives, such as union delegates, to enforce the "highest practical standards" in workplaces, such as physical distancing.
McManus said that medical experts had determined 1.5 metres of distance was appropriate for safety, so that's what should be enforced in workplaces "unless the science changes".
The ACTU is also calling for paid pandemic leave for all employees to get tested for Covid-19 and self-isolate in the event of a positive diagnosis, to be paid for by employers, to remove the "disincentive" preventing workers without leave, such as casuals, from getting tested.
"We've already been through a lot of pain to the economy and all the jobs lost in the last eight weeks – and to make it all worth it we have to get this bit right."
The industrial relations minister, Christian Porter, endorsed the ACTU's call for a mandatory requirement to inform work health and safety regulators of a Covid-19 infection at a workplace, accepting it was a "strong point", but promised only to consider the other measures.
Porter told ABC TV his "initial assessment" was that the legal framework requiring a safe working environment is already in place in state and territory laws.
Although Covid-19 was a novel risk, Porter suggested employers needed industry-specific guidance, published by Safe Work Australia, about their workplaces rather than further regulations.