Number of positive Covid-19 tests from Melbourne Cedar Meats outbreak rises to 45
One of the largest clusters in Victoria was first detected at the facility after a workplace accident
Forty-five people connected with Melbourne's Cedar Meats Processing plant have now tested positive to Covid-19 after 11 new cases were confirmed on Tuesday.
Although the state government has refused to identify the abattoir, Cedar Meats general manager Tony Kairouz confirmed his facility was the centre of the outbreak.
"A number of our employees have tested positive for coronavirus in one of our facilities in West Melbourne."
He said the plant became aware of the outbreak on 27 April, after a worker was rushed to hospital several days earlier due to a workplace accident.
A spokeswoman from Cedar Meats confirmed that this worker was at the centre of a virus scare at Sunshine hospital last month.
He received emergency surgery on 23 April after severing his thumb at the Cedar Meatworks.
The worker later developed symptoms and tested positive for Covid-19. The 24 staff at Sunshine hospital who had contact with him were forced to self isolate and undergo testing.
"On Wednesday 29 April 2020 we were informed that four of our staff had contracted Covid-19. All staff worked in one area of the plant," Kairouz said.
"By Thursday 30 April we mandated to all staff that they had to get tested for Covid-19. We worked closely with DHHS [Department of Health and Human Services] and by the end of the day Friday 1 May, all staff had been sent for testing," Kairouz said.
"All workers are self-quarantining and we are working closely with the Victorian health authorities. All meat processed at our facilities is processed in accordance with Australian Standards for food safety and our customers can be confident that the meat processed at our facilities is safe to eat."
Victoria's treasurer, Tim Pallas, said on Tuesday 11 of Victoria's 17 new cases were connected with the plant.
The company appears to have shut down its website since announcing it was connected to the outbreak.
The Cedar Meats home page only displays a short statement from Kairouz. The only links are to other statements about the outbreak.
It was suggested on social media that this was an effort to hide information, but the spokeswoman for Cedar Meats said this was due to the website crashing due to large traffic volume over the weekend.
"We are working to get the full website back up," she said.
Primesafe, Victoria's meat industry regulatory body, said meat from animals slaughtered at Cedar Meats was still safe to eat.
"In accordance with advice from Food Standards Australia New Zealand there is no evidence that Covid-19 can be transmitted to people through food or packaging," a spokesperson for Primesafe said in a statement.
"Based on this information, consumers can have confidence that meat processed at the facility is safe to eat,"
Victoria's chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, said on Monday the facility began moving towards a shutdown as soon as the outbreak was identified and was now closed.
"It's not a risk to the general community and it's not going to get out of control," he told reporters on Monday.
The factory could not close immediately because of animal welfare issues, he said. It will remain closed for two weeks to undergo deep cleaning.
"The aim is to be reopened by the 18 May," a spokeswoman said.
The bulk of workers who tested positive over the weekend were asymptomatic and were in quarantine before receiving the result.
According to a report on the industry website Sheepcentral.com, in the weeks before the outbreak the company had delivered 35 tonnes of mutton to the Chinese city of Wuhan, believed to be where the virus began.
The report said the meat delivery was backloaded onto a plane that was arriving from Wuhan to deliver medical supplies to Australia.
"Meatworks are particularly vulnerable, we have seen from the US an extremely large outbreak," Sutton said.
"In some ways because they are forced to work closer than some other workplaces."
A report from the Centre for Disease Control in the US said more than 4,900 workers at meat processing plants had contracted the virus, nearly 4% of the industry's workforce. Twenty workers have died.