Essential poll: Australians warm to easing of Covid-19 restrictions but are divided on schools
People over the age of 55 are more reluctant to wind back controls than younger people, while women are more likely to be cautious than men
Australians are warming up to the idea of easing Covid-19 restrictions, with the number of people saying it is too soon to stop the lockdowns falling from 49% to 37% over the past fortnight, according to the latest Guardian Essential poll.
The latest survey of 1,093 respondents comes as the national cabinet meets on Tuesday to continue deliberations on the relaxation of current restrictions on non-essential services, and consider the possible implementation of a trans-Tasman "travel bubble" between Australia and New Zealand – with Jacinda Ardern dialling in by video-conference.
While survey participants are more favourably disposed to easing public health-related restrictions in Australia than they were two weeks ago, the latest poll suggests people are divided on school closures.
Half the sample agreed with the statement "schools should teach most students remotely until the Covid-19 outbreak passes" and 41% of respondents with children agreed with the statement: "Even if schools in my state are open, I will still choose to keep my children home because of the Covid-19 outbreak."
Just under half the sample, 45%, said schools should reopen for all children, and 52%, agreed with the statement: "It is unreasonable to expect teachers to prepare separate lessons for children who are learning remotely and for children who still attend school."
Around a third of the sample, 36%, think restrictions should start to ease over the next month or two. Only 10% are in rush, saying restrictions should go as soon as possible.
People over the age of 55 are more reluctant to wind back controls than younger people, with 44% of those over 55 in the sample saying it's too soon compared with 28% of people between 18 and 34. Women are also more likely to be cautious than men.
Morrison has been keen to project that Australia is now on a path to easing some of the Covid-19 restrictions now that the curve of infections has been flattened, and concrete steps are expected to be announced this Friday.
The prime minister has also pressed for school students to return to classroom learning, but the states have moved slowly on reopening schools, with Victoria refusing to switch course until the state has conducted mass testing over the next week.
Tensions between the jurisdictions boiled over on Sunday. The federal education minister, Dan Tehan, launched a swingeing political attack on the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, accusing him of taking a "sledgehammer" to education.
Tehan withdrew his comments a couple of hours later after Victoria queried whether he had overstepped the mark, and announced it would close a school campus because a teacher had returned a positive test for Covid-19. The federal education minister later blamed the outburst on "frustration".
The closure of schools has been a persistent source of tension between the jurisdictions, but Andrews told reporters in Melbourne on Monday the national cabinet continued to work well, was taking the advice of "experts" and would not let "personal frustrations" get in the way of good decision-making.
The latest survey suggests Morrison's response to the pandemic is continuing to get a thumbs up from voters. The prime minister's approval rating has increased in the latest survey for the fourth straight month. In February it was 39% and now it is 64%. Morrison is enjoying approval from 92% of Coalition voters.
Morrison is also comfortably ahead of the Labor leader Anthony Albanese as preferred prime minister, with 50% of participants rating him ahead of Albanese, who is on 25%. Around a quarter of the sample is undecided on this question.
Albanese's approval rating is 42%. A month ago it was 44%. Albanese's approval among Labor voters is 63%. Given this is Albanese's first term as Labor leader, he has a higher proportion of voters who are undecided about whether they approve or disapprove of his performance. The undecided cohort had been trending down over the opening months of 2020, but it is now back up again to 31%.
Morrison may be the beneficiary of comparisons with the United States and the United Kingdom. While a strong majority of Australians surveyed rate New Zealand's handling of the crisis as either good or very good (79%) – with Australia and New Zealand enjoying comparable success in flattening the curve of infections – 71% of the sample thinks the Trump administration has bungled the crisis.
The United Kingdom also rates poorly, with 48% saying there has been a poor response in that country.
While Morrison has been at pains to say the fiscal support given to Australians during the crisis is finite, the survey suggests there would be community support for boosting the rate of unemployment benefits after the current crisis passes.
More than half the sample, 57% favours keeping Newstart at the level it has been during the crisis, so effectively doubled, or aligning it with the rate paid to single pensioners. Only 28% favours halving the rate after the pandemic.
The margin of error in the survey is plus or minus 3%.