Coronavirus Australia latest: 4 May at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Naaman Zhou with the latest developments from Monday, 4 May.
A 15th resident of the Anglicare Newmarch House aged care facility has died, bringing Australia's coronavirus death toll to 96. Labor today called for the aged care royal commission to investigate the outbreak at the western Sydney facility, where there are now 63 confirmed cases among staff and residents.
In what she described as an unprecedented move, New Zealand's prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, will attend tomorrow's meeting of the national cabinet.
That means Ardern will meet with prime minister Scott Morrison, as well as the leaders of the states and territories. Ardern said today they will discuss re-opening travel between the two countries but that she does not expect that to happen in the "very, very near future".
The science minister, Karen Andrews, said it would be at least 10 months before the CSIRO made a Covid-19 vaccine for widespread use. Andrews said the CSIRO was testing two vaccines, one from the US and one from the UK.
The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, announced that schools will gradually return to onsite learning from May 11. That will part of a staggered return. Kindy, prep and years 11 and 12 will return on 11 May, then years 2 to 10 will return on 25 May.
After four days of no active Covid-19 cases, the ACT recorded a new case today. A woman in her 20s acquired the infection overseas, according to health authorities. This means there is now one active case in the territory.
Victoria recorded 22 new cases today, with 19 of those related to a cluster at a meat processing plant. That was Victoria's largest daily increase in cases in two weeks.
Tasmania's premier, Peter Gutwein, said he would keep the island's statewide restrictions in place at least until 15 May. Last week, Gutwein had relaxed the harsher lockdown in the north-west region, but currently all other restrictions still apply.