Coronavirus Australia latest: 3 May at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, and welcome to our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Christopher Knaus with the latest developments from Sunday 2 May.
The education minister, Dan Tehan, began the day with a scathing attack on Victorian premier Daniel Andrews over his position on schools.
The state government's current position is that all students who can learn from home must do so.
Tehan alleged on the ABC's Insiders that Andrews had taken a "sledgehammer" to education by resisting wider reopening, and questioned his leadership.
The comments represented a significant tonal shift from an otherwise impressive period of bipartisanship, via the Covid-19 national cabinet. The state health minister, Jenny Mikakos, immediately hit back, saying:
"I think Victorians understand who's been leading the effort in Victoria, how to keep them safe, to suppress the number of cases that we're seeing in Victoria, and that's certainly not been Dan Tehan."
The state government also revealed on Sunday that a Melbourne primary school teacher had been infected with coronavirus, prompting the closure of the school for three days.
Later on Sunday, Tehan issued a statement withdrawing his comments, saying he had spoken in frustration at the prospect children would miss their education.
"It was this frustration that led me to overstep the mark in questioning premier Andrew's leadership on this matter and I withdraw."
Australia's death toll rose to 95 following another death in NSW at the Newmarch House aged care home, and the death of an 83-year-old woman in WA.
The death of 76-year-old Ann Fahey at Newmarch is the 14th death connected to the aged care facility since the start of the pandemic. Fahey had previously tested negative to Covid-19 twice before she returned a positive test on Thursday.
Her son, Mark Fahey, told the Guardian earlier this week that his mother had done everything to protect herself.
"I don't understand. She was a model patient, did everything right, she's shut herself in her room the entire time," Fahey said.
In WA, the state government said the 83-year-old woman who died had contracted Covid-19 from close contact. She was admitted to hospital in mid-April and died on 30 April.
WA recorded no new cases overnight, the fourth consecutive day of zero cases. It now has only 19 active cases across the state.
The chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, said about one in four Australian adults with a smartphone had downloaded the COVIDSafe App.
Uptake of the app has been tempered by concerns about privacy and data security. But Murphy said a greater uptake might help to relieve restrictions sooner.
"The more we have signed up, the more confidence I'll be able to give national cabinet that they can make a decision," Murphy said. "The more confidence they can have, the more bold they might be."
Murphy also indicated that universities might be able to resume some face-to-face teaching. The sector would be discussed at national cabinet this week, and Murphy said he expected a recommendation to partially reopen some of the more necessary face-to-face functions.
"I think universities are clearly in the mix of things that we're talking about with national cabinet this week," he said. "It is likely that they will start to recommence some activities, without pre-empting the decision of national cabinet."
The positive trend of low rates of new cases continued on Sunday. Only 18 new cases were recorded in the past 24 hours. That's within the government's current target of 20.
In South Australia, the state's chief medical officer, Nicola Spurrier, said she was hopeful the state could soon be free of Covid-19.
SA has had its 11th consecutive day without a new Covid-19 case. There are only seven active cases remaining.
"If we don't have any more cases, soon we will be able to say that we have no one with Covid-19 in the state, which will certainly be something to celebrate," she said.
South Australia joined the ACT, Western Australia, and Tasmania in recording no new cases. Queensland recorded a single new case.
The NRL's plans to resume competition later this month took another step forward as the New Zealand Warriors flew in to the NSW town of Tamworth. But one player, Nathaniel Roache, was unable to travel as he reported feeling unwell.