Oxfam to cut half its Australian workforce as coronavirus inflames existing woes
The charity was struggling before the pandemic hit and will be forced to shed staff to remain viable
Oxfam Australia is preparing to cut close to half of its workforce, citing financial difficulties stemming from years of reduced fundraising income and a "persistent decline in overseas aid budget" well before the coronavirus pandemic hit.
Oxfam sends aid around the world, including funding work with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities in Australia and fair trade producers in 18 countries.
Guardian Australia has confirmed that discussions began with staff earlier this week, and Oxfam had decided to redesign the organisation.
The charity is planning to reduce the number of full-time staff from 185 to 94 between now and October.
Oxfam Australia chief executive Lyn Morgain said it was an "exceptionally challenging financial environment", with the charity having a reduction in donations during the summer bushfires in Australia, leading into the coronavirus pandemic.
"Oxfam Australia entered the coronavirus crisis in a weakened financial position because of multiple factors that are impacting on the sector, including the fallout from the Australian bushfires, several years of reduced fundraising income and a persistent decline in the overseas aid budget," she said in a statement.
"Oxfam's life-saving work is needed now more than ever to respond to the coronavirus and multiple other crises that threaten to increase the number of people living in poverty and exacerbate inequality.
"But at the same time, the economic downturn caused by the pandemic has underscored the urgent need for changes that were already under way at Oxfam."
Final decisions about the roles are yet to be made, with staff consultations under way, but Morgain said in order to be financially stable, Oxfam needed to reduce costs.
"Incredibly tough decisions are being made and there will be job losses. We know this is an extremely difficult time for our dedicated and passionate staff – and these decisions in no way reflect their performance."
The charity closed its Australian retail outlets mid last year.
In 2018-19, the charity reported $86.9m in revenue, the majority from public donations, followed by grant income. In its annual report Oxfam said it had experienced a deteriorating working capital position, and was disheartened by federal government reduction in the aid program.
A spokeswoman for Oxfam said the charity was still working out whether it was eligible for the federal government's jobkeeper program.
"Like other organisations across the sector, Oxfam is assessing its eligibility for the jobkeeper program. We welcomed clarification offered to international aid organisations last Friday and the extension of dates for applications to next Friday."