Morrison says 'early mark' of eased restrictions depends on uptake of Covidsafe tracing app
Prime minister dangles prospect of potential loosening of Australia's coronavirus rules next Friday
Scott Morrison has offered Australians an "early mark" to ease Covid-19 restrictions next week while warning a return to normality will depend on uptake of the Covidsafe contact tracing app.
The prime minister dangled the prospect of a potential loosening of the rules next Friday as he issued his strongest declaration yet that it was conditional on more downloads.
Morrison also revealed that net overseas migration is down 30% and is expected to fall by 80% in 2020-21, both compared with 2018-19, in a sign the economic contraction from Covid-19 will last much longer than restrictions to social life. Treasury officials and the Reserve Bank both estimate that unemployment is set to top 10%.
The first restrictions were eased this week with New South Wales allowing visits to friends and relatives, and a similar measure announced on Friday in the Australian Capital Territory, the first Australian jurisdiction with no active cases.
The ACT chief minister, Andrew Barr, described allowing family visits and resumption of non-essential retail as a "downpayment" on further changes to be considered next week, expected to include allowing small outdoor gatherings as a first step out of the lockdown.
Morrison said two further meetings of national cabinet were scheduled next week and then leaders would decide next Friday "about how restrictions can be eased".
Morrison told reporters in Canberra that 3.5 million Australians have downloaded the Covidsafe tracing app, explaining that boosting downloads is one of four unmet conditions to ease restrictions.
"We need that tool so that we can open up the economy," he said, declining to nominate a precise target.
"It's over to you, Australia."
Morrison acknowledged the need to tread carefully. "We do not want to go into a start-stop or – even worse – a reverse process into the future," he said.
The health minister, Greg Hunt, had previously suggested a target of 40% – which would suggest as many as 10 million Australians would need to download the app – but that figure was disavowed by health department officials who have said even 20% would be a good result.
Morrison noted that regulations governing the app prevent employers mandating employees download it, but suggested businesses, including cafes, would encourage their patrons to do so in a bid to restart the economy.
Appearing alongside the sports and aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, Morrison announced an extra $205m for the aged care sector to implement an industry code of practice on protection against Covid-19.
Colbeck said the national cabinet had developed a set of principles for phased resumption of community sport, starting with non-contact activities with 10 or fewer participants ramping up to full contact training and competition.
According to a government statement, the initial phase allows for the resumption of children's outdoor sport with strict physical distancing measures for non-sporting attendees such as parents, and outdoor recreational activities including outdoor-based personal training and boot camps, golf, fishing, bush-walking, and swimming.
But the principles note that "individual jurisdictions will determine progression through these phases".
Even with the prospect of restrictions being eased, the economic impacts of the coronavirus crisis continue to mount.
Morrison said Australia was facing a "significant fall" in net overseas migration which would trigger a "lag impact" on the Australian economy beyond the immediate health crisis.
He argued it was not a "long-term" change, suggesting it would be reasonable to assume borders would be open by the end of 2021, but he noted Australia had outperformed expectations in the past six weeks.
Morrison revealed some 650,000 businesses had signed up to the jobkeeper program, an increase on the 540,000 businesses and 3.3 million employees reported by Treasury officials on Tuesday.
Morrison played down the possibility of further changes to the $130bn program, noting that there are "many calls" on the federal budget – including jobseeker unemployment benefits – and the commonwealth has "no plans" to change eligibility of either program beyond administrative changes.
Morrison also said it was too soon to say whether the free childcare package would be extended beyond late June, when it is due to expire.
The government has previously kept the door open to having it in place for six months, similar to other support packages, but there have been lingering concerns across the childcare sector that their normal funding is down.
The chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, said testing for Covid-19 would be expanded to include samples of certain groups that were not showing symptoms – including health and aged care workers and elective surgery patients.
The aim of this testing, Murphy said, was "to make sure that our confidence that we don't have significant asymptomatic transmission is correct".
The government's latest modelling on the effective rate of transmission covers fewer states than last week, because of a lack of data.
In the two states where there were adequate figures – NSW and Tasmania – the rate of transmission remained below 1, meaning one person with the virus transmitted it to fewer than one person on average.
Murphy said Tasmania was comfortably now below the 1 benchmark, as it had brought the outbreak in the north-west of the state under control.