I love being a GP in Australia but the attacks on our profession are too much
Even before Covid-19, the rates freeze, lack of frontline support and primary care fragmentation made it hard to stay afloat
My life of a millennial GP used to be simple – look after patients, then go home and enjoy life. The onset of the Covid-19 pandemic changed all of that. General practice is being attacked from all fronts – the years of neglect by successive federal governments leaving primary care struggling to cope with the challenges of a pandemic. There is an irony to the government thanking our frontline workers, promising that there are stockpiles of magical personal protective equipment (PPE) somewhere just waiting to be handed out, contrasting with the bleak reality of seeing face to face consults often without a mask, gown or goggles.
To date my surgery has received 100 surgical face masks and 20 N95 masks. This was two months ago.
GPs are constantly reminded that we are part of the frontline, that we should be testing for Covid-19, that we should be seeing common colds and flus and picking up the pieces of deteriorating mental health and burden of cancelled elective surgeries. It was ambitious to expect private small businesses (GP clinics) and self-employed contractors (individual GPs) to move with the rapidly changing environment without clear government support.
This has only been possible through the innovation of practice owners and doctors in sourcing their own protective equipment, including respirators and face shields from Bunnings, and banding together to support each other through conflicting guidelines form state and federal health departments.
The vast majority of my patients have been highly cooperative, respectful and accepting of their civic duty to ensure the safety of not only themselves but the community. There have been exceptions though: patients who demand to be tested despite not meeting guidelines; employers demanding clearance certificates when told that is not possible; patients abusing reception staff when told the flu shot is not in stock yet or otherwise demanding that they be able to have it for free when clearly not eligible. Perhaps the most disappointing is patients ignorantly or wilfully exposing other patients and the staff to potential infection by not being truthful when asked screening questions, but telling you of their sore throat, runny nose or cough only in the consulting room. This is why some GPs choose not to see patients face to face. They have their own families and health to look after too.
One positive out of this pandemic has been the introduction of telehealth consults. It has allowed our vulnerable doctors to continue practising from home and our vulnerable patients to continue receiving care without putting themselves at risk. It has been something that has been called for by doctors of all specialties for years.
Disappointingly, along with the new telehealth item numbers, I have noticed my Facebook feed littered with ads for telehealth GPs offering anything from a men's health check to referrals, scripts or medical certificates. To them it is an opportunity for business but in reality it is just further fragmentation of care. Of course the convenience is appealing, but is it safe?
Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/05/05-61553-gnl.fw.200505.jf.ch7DW.mp3
I have always been cranky with my receptionists when they fit in a patient for "just a script", "just a medical certificate" or "just a referral". To me it is an opportunity for preventative care, to do blood pressures, check on routine bloods and cancer screening and to address little problems before they become bigger ones. These are opportunities that could not have been done with pop-up telehealth services but I am glad to be able to continue to do so as a GP. This continuity of care is highlighted by how efficient a telehealth consult is on a regular patient. Similarly, the Pharmacy Guild of Australia's advocacy to push community pharmacists to do flu shots, prescribe the contraceptive pill, or antibiotics for a urinary tract infection, are further attempts to fragment care – an appealing business decision at the expense of patient care.
The potential collapse of GP practices with the downturn in patients has been highlighted in the media recently. This is not an issue unique to Covid-19 but one that it has accelerated. Medicare item numbers for GP consults were frozen from 2013 to 2018, with increases afterwards that are tokenistic at best. It is the reason why practices struggle to maintain bulk billing rates, as the burden of paying for increasing overheads, staff and medical supplies means that charging a gap is necessary for survival. Even when telehealth was introduced it was forbidden to charge a gap – effectively halving practice incomes on top of the downturn in patients. It is not a surprise that practices are struggling to stay afloat.
Funding general practice doesn't win votes. But I love keeping patients out of hospital, finding their cancers early or preventing their heart attacks. I'd rather cut out a melanoma in its early stages than be the oncologist treating the melanoma that has already spread. How efficient would more prevention be in our healthcare system?
Even with Covid-19 , we could have engaged GP practices, armed with PPE, swabs and training, to roll out testing, public health education and prevent community spread early on. Why has the emphasis on funding been on hospitals, intensive care units and ventilators?
GPs are being asked to weather the storm, fight on minimal funding and look after their community. The freezing of MBS rates, the lack of frontline support and the fragmentation of primary care to pharmacies and telehealth corporates – this is wave after wave of insults that I fear the profession cannot take much longer. Many GPs are already leaving the profession. Some are only staying for the sake of their patients. There is a struggle to attract new trainees.
Something needs to change. We cannot wait for the profession to succumb before we finally realise the importance of primary care to our nation's health.
Dr Richard Nguyen is a GP in southern Sydney