Remdesivir: five Australian hospitals to receive experimental coronavirus drug
Exclusive: St Vincent's in Sydney is the only confirmed location so far, as NSW Health negotiates with US pharmaceutical giant Gilead
The US pharmaceutical company Gilead is finalising the location of five hospitals in Australia to receive the highly sought-after experimental coronavirus drug remdesivir.
The only confirmed location is St Vincent's hospital in Sydney, a major tertiary hospital and the centre of many of the New South Wales outbreak areas. A NSW Health spokeswoman confirmed the health department "has been engaging with Gilead on gaining access to the drug for Covid-19 patients".
The news comes as the doctor informing the Covid-19 response in the White House, the immunologist Dr Anthony Fauci, promoted preliminary findings from a joint Gilead and National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases study that suggested remdesivir could improve recovery time of patients. His comments have revived global hope in the drug, with no treatments now available for the virus.
But experts have warned that the study findings are unpublished and preliminary. The US clinical trial registry also shows that Gilead altered the primary outcome measures of the trial halfway through. It broadened its definition of "recovery" and included patients who were still in hospital and who were at home but requiring oxygen in its group of recovered patients. Changing the primary outcomes of a study is often viewed by scientists with scepticism in any clinical trial, as it is often done to improve the significance of results after the initial outcomes proved disappointing. This is known as "fishing for significance". Nine members of the US panel that establishes treatment guidelines have a financial interest in Gilead.
A separate study from China published in the prestigious medical journal the Lancet showed no statistically clinical benefit in Covid-19 patients in health improvement or mortality after they were given remdesivir. But the researchers tested a smaller number of patients than the US trial and concluded that their findings would require confirmation from larger studies. The study was stopped early by the data safety monitoring board because of difficulty recruiting patients.
Even if the drug does ultimately prove effective, it is likely to be used in a similar way to the influenza drug Tamiflu, shortening the duration of illness but not curing it. The US study showed patients given remdesivir improved only moderately, after an average of 11 days, compared with an average of 15 days for those not given the treatment.
Dr Gaetan Burgio, head of the transgenesis facility at the John Curtin School of Medical Research at the Australian National University in Canberra, said the studies so far revealed remdesivir "is not a silver bullet against Covid-19".
"It is therefore more critical than ever to keep social distancing, wearing masks or follow other preventive measures to limit the spread and eliminate the virus," Burgio said.
Prof Sarah Palmer, the co-director of the Centre for Virus Research at the Westmead Institute for Medical Research in Sydney, said: "There is still a lot to learn about this disease.
"We cannot base our medical response on this one promising study. This drug is still in early clinical trials and is not currently widely available. It is possible depending upon a wide range of issues including, production, licensing, urgency that it will become available in Australia in the future."