Meet the trans key workers treating, teaching and serving the UK
Five trans key workers describe life at the height of the Covid-19 pandemic
Last year, London hosted its first Trans Pride. The event returns on Saturday with a protest calling for reform of the Gender Recognition Act and supporting the rights of intersex and non-binary people. With the coronavirus pandemic as a backdrop to the event, we spoke to five trans key workers about their experiences over the past six months.
Joshua Barraclough, NHS 111 health adviser/Yorkshire ambulance service, Sheffield
Covid came out of nowhere very, very quickly. Things were changing on a day-to-day basis. There was a lot of anxiety from callers, just not knowing what to do. Colleagues in 111 and in the Yorkshire ambulance service sadly passed away from Covid, so it definitely wasn't this distant threat.
We have a lot of compassion and care for people, but there's also a turning it off in your mind and separating it from your life and your family. I love painting and making things. The only way I can really switch off is doing something intricate that takes a lot of concentration.
I've been seconded on and off since June last year to create a trans toolkit for the National Ambulance LGBT Network. It's to give healthcare staff a better understanding of some of the struggles trans people might find themselves in and how our staff can support them.
We found there were issues with the ambulance crew asking inappropriate questions and issues around confidentiality, even when the medical issue had nothing to do with their trans identity.
I had a hip injury and when I went for an x-ray, they asked if I had any metal on my jeans. I said I've got a metal button and zip and they just came and pulled my trousers down. It was really humiliating. I think for a cis person it would be difficult, but for a trans person who has gender dysphoria they are particularly vulnerable.
My friend Jake took his own life in December 2017. He was a young trans man and my best friend. When I got the opportunity to write the toolkit, I decided to pour everything I've got into it. I don't know if anything that's in it would have saved Jake's life, but maybe it could save other trans peoples' lives who are suffering.
Kamilla Kamaruddin, GP, London
At the core of what GPs do is building a trusting relationship. With telephones and multimedia consultations, it's very difficult to build this. We're not picking up the body language, the silent symptoms.
But the pandemic has also introduced the opportunity for change. For example, when we used to have meetings it would take us a long time to travel to that place, whereas with Zoom you can attend from anywhere. I was in Brussels and there was a meeting about creating a complimentary test-and-trace scheme in Tower Hamlets that I was able to attend. It maximises your participation.
When I informed the practice to say that I wanted to transition, they gave me applause. They only asked one thing: what shall we tell the patients? I was worried about the reception, so I took the decision to tell them myself.
Patients who knew me from before were very happy for me. I didn't receive any hostility. We live in a multi-ethnic society; a lot of our female patients wear long, very modest clothes. After I transitioned they allowed me to examine them. For me that was such a big acceptance. For new patients, either they didn't know or they didn't care.
What I realised is that revealing my identity is not just about asking people for acceptance, but it's at the core of what GPs do; we are supposed to be inclusive. Personalised care is about treating the individual rather than what your gender is or your sexual orientation, your colour.
I'm doing more work on improving healthcare for trans people, but now I also just want to be known as a GP who does good things. I'm a trans GP, but I'm also a GP.
Kacey de Groot, drama teacher, Coventry
During lockdown most of my work was at home and it's been really difficult. For me, being a teacher is being practical, being in a classroom and moving around the space.
But there's a lot of creativity about how we can do things better. For example, in our department, children do very little writing until they start a GCSE course in drama, but lockdown meant we had to set some writing tasks because a lot of them won't be prepared or have the confidence to act by themselves. The creativity has been amazing.
We had some incredible videos that students sent in, performing in their back gardens or in their living rooms. I'm not making a positive of lockdown, but it is a positive aspect of it.
We've built video resources as well, and we've become better at doing things like recording PowerPoints with a voiceover.
The huge challenge was kids not engaging. You could feel the stress from them. Some kids thrived and their learning was exponential, but some of them found it really difficult. They needed the structure and time with a teacher. If they didn't work efficiently by themselves, then they beat themselves up about it and shut down, so finding that nurture space was really difficult.
I announced that I was trans on a Friday at the end of school and then came back on Monday morning. There was a kid who pointed me out and then about seven or eight of the kids just went "shut up". People were like, "You all right, miss?" and "Hi, miss!" They wanted to affirm me. Kids are more open with me now. More kids come to speak to me at the end of lessons than before. I don't know if it's how they see male or female teachers or if it's about the way that I am now, being more authentic. I'm a much calmer teacher in lots of ways.
Sam Carrick, supermarket worker, Fareham
The pandemic has put the public's feelings towards key workers under a microscope. Everyone appreciates key workers now, but would it have been the same without the pandemic? I'm not sure it would, to be honest.
In that way it's helped a lot. It feels like a less hostile environment. I've noticed people are a lot less likely to ask store workers for help at the minute.
The biggest challenge has been dealing with people who don't follow the guidelines. Coronavirus isn't super bad here, we don't have that many cases, so people think they're invincible and they'll just walk right next to me without wearing a mask.
You've got to balance good customer service with protecting yourself. So what I normally do is take a step back and carry on the conversation because I feel it would be rude for me to ask them.
People need to think about whether their appreciation for key workers is unconditional or not, because I think it's a bit hypocritical to say, "Well done, NHS" while also trying to take away the rights of trans kids who need the NHS. It also goes for people who are pushing against Black Lives Matter while saying that key workers are important.
I didn't really come out at work as non-binary as such. I put it on my job application. It was never really an issue. I think a lot of cisgender people are pushing this idea that it's so abnormal, but in actuality it can be as simple as ticking a box on a form.
Ramses Underhill-Smith, director of Alternative Care Services (social care agency for older LGBT people), London
It's been a very nerve-racking time. We had people coming out of hospital and we were told that they were Covid-free, and then clinicians came and said they're not Covid-free. Luckily, I bought a lot of PPE just before the pandemic started. I kind of saw it coming.
I know a lot of care staff got a lot of blame as opposed to a lot of praise, so the key worker stuff didn't feel like it applied to us. It's a low-paid job and people can think it's unskilled, and seniors aren't necessarily valued in our community. But it's an extremely difficult job. You're caring for someone who might have dementia, or is visually or physically impaired. People [care workers] go from place to place in the cold, in the rain, in the snow, on Christmas Day.
Half of my staff are not from the LGBT community, but all of them know that is what the focus of our company is. What I found is that for the cisgender staff that work for us, all these stereotypes are broken down, and then they go back into the community (and I've got people that come from all different communities), and it's just amazing to listen to them challenge other people's stereotypes.
The thing about me being trans is, my family love me, and they don't have an issue with me. They have an issue with what people think. When other people come into the equation, there's this whole shaming. People weaponise shame. "You should be ashamed, this is not normal." What they mean is, it's not standard. I am not a standard person, I wasn't born standard, and I won't die a standard person. So, you know, it is what it is, really.