Hands, face, space ... break international law: Politics Weekly podcast
Heather Stewart and Polly Toynbee discuss what the new Covid-19 restrictions entail, as well as the latest UK Brexit legislation, for which the government is willing to break international law. Anand Menon and Jennifer Rankin discuss the prospect of getting an EU trade deal. Plus Simon Murphy speaks to Tracey Crouch about the role footballers should have in politics
Heather and Polly question how dangerous the UK government's admission that it plans to break international law might be. They also look at what the new restrictions announced by Boris Johnson will mean for people in England when they are introduced from next Monday.
With the Brexit negotiations between the EU and the British government entering their eighth round this week, Heather speaks to the Guardian's Brussels correspondent, Jennifer Rankin, and the director of the UK in a Changing Europe thinktank, Anand Menon, about how likely it is that the two sides will come up with a deal.
Plus, Simon Murphy talks to the Conservative MP Tracey Crouch about the Sustain the Game initiative, why she wants to see local fans back in lower-tier stadiums, and how she has worked through the summer after receiving a breast diagnosis diagnosis in June.
The Guardian is editorially independent.
And we want to keep our journalism open and accessible to all.
But we increasingly need our readers to fund our work.
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.