Parkrun to return in England as 'benefits outweigh Covid risks'
Free runs to start again in October after pandemic highlights importance of keeping fit
Runners in England are celebrating parkrun returning towards the end of October after the organisers said they believed the benefits outweighed the risks.
The free weekly timed runs were suspended across the UK on 18 March, shortly before the country was put into lockdown.
In a recent survey, almost 80% of UK parkrunners said they would return in four weeks, given the opportunity.
"Everything in life comes with a risk, and we know and accept that we cannot remove all risks from the parkrun environment," said Nick Pearson, the event's global chief executive officer.
"However, it is also important to balance the public health benefits of reopening our events, against the associated public health risks. We now believe, having spent considerable time gathering and understanding the evidence, that the benefits to reopening parkrun far outweigh the risks."
Getting communities running again was more important than ever, said Pearson. "The last six months have increased inequalities around health and wellbeing, with many people more isolated and less active than ever in their life," he said. "Across many communities our events provide the most accessible and inclusive opportunities for people, of all abilities and backgrounds, to come together and be active."
He added: "Whilst therefore it is absolutely critical we all remain cautious, and closely follow government guidance, we can say that the chances of an infectious person being in attendance at a specific parkrun event is relatively low."
Parkrun, which started in 2004 with 13 runners in Bushy Park in London, now operates in 22 countries. Four million people have taken part in one of the free timed runs, with an estimated 350,000 people turning out each weekend for either the main 5km run or the junior version, which is 2km.
No date has yet been set for parkrun's return to Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland due to current restrictions in those countries. "However, we are aware of the implications of only opening in England and are continuing our work to overcome the challenges that this presents. We are also as committed as ever to opening our events outside of England as soon as possible," said Pearson.
The English events would restart "toward the end of October this year" he said, not giving a firm date.
The news was greeted with joy by many parkrunners, including Oliver Dowden, the secretary of state for culture, media and sport.
"Great news that @parkrunUk is coming back. Outdoor sport is low risk &amp; there will be additional safety measures. We've got to get Britain match-fit to beat this virus, and a 5k run at whatever pace you can is great for physical &amp; mental health!" he tweeted.
In preparation, Parkrun commissioned a rapid review of the evidence by Canterbury Christ Church University, led by Prof Mike Weed.
The review concluded that, with appropriate evidence-based mitigations in place, it would be possible to deliver outdoor events and activities across a range of sectors, and of varying sizes and formats, in a way that did not significantly increase risk of Covid-19 transmission, said Pearson.
He added: "We also know that, whilst the majority of people are likely to welcome this announcement as a huge step toward parkrun returning, many people will feel anxious and nervous around the thought of public gatherings. We are here for everyone, and over the coming weeks and months will be providing all the support we can, such that people can feel confident returning to their parks and open spaces."