Three schools in Teesside confirm coronavirus cases but will not be closed
Schools in Redcar, Hartlepool and Middlesbrough record positive cases as infections in north-east of England continue to spike
Three schools in Teesside have confirmed cases of coronavirus as infections in parts of the north-east of England continued to grow quickly.
Redcar and Cleveland borough council said on Sunday that a positive case had been recorded at St Benedict's RC primary school in Redcar.
The local authority said the school would remain open and that parents had been provided with advice.
The outbreak, which added to infections at schools in Hartlepool and Middlesbrough, will heighten concerns that the return of schools in England will increase the spread of the disease.
In Redcar and Cleveland, 38 new coronavirus cases were recorded in the seven days to 1 September – the equivalent of 27.7 per 100,000 people, up from 10.2 in the seven days to 25 August.
The north-east of England is emerging as one of the most at-risk areas and health officials have warned that tests for Covid-19 were running out in the region. Middlesbrough was added to the Government's Covid-19 watchlist as an "area of concern" on Friday.
In Hartlepool, St Aidan's Church of England primary school said in a Facebook post to parents on Sunday that it had a confirmed Covid-19 case, while in Middlesbrough Outwood Academy Ormesby, said in a short statement that a confirmed case had been found "within the school community".
In a statement to parents on Sunday, St Aidan's headteacher, Lynn Chambers, said the "individual" who tested positive was sent home after they showed symptoms.
She said: "Public Health England advised that as no child had been in close contact with the individual there was no need for any child to stay at home or self-isolate as a result."
Outwood Academy Ormesby, in Netherfields, Middlesbrough, said the person who tested positive did not contract the virus at the secondary school.
In a Facebook post on Sunday, it said: "We have worked with experts from Public Health England to take all of the steps we need to and have already identified all those who need to stay at home and self-isolate.
"If we have not already spoken directly to you about this, then your child does not need to make any change to their usual routine, including attending school.
"To be clear, your child should attend school as normal unless you have already been contacted directly to advise that they should self isolate."
The rate in Hartlepool also experienced a jump, from 7.5 to 22.4, with 21 new cases, while Middlesbrough's rate has risen from 28.4 to 31.2, with 44 new cases.