Pupils with special needs 'forgotten' as English schools reopen
Study says 20,000 Send children are unlikely to resume classes because of safety concerns
Pupils at special schools in England have been "forgotten about" in the rush to restart full-time education, with 20,000 children with special needs unlikely to return to school because of safety concerns, according to a study.
Parents of children with special educational needs and disabilities (Send) said they were concerned about sending their children back to school in September because their children were medically vulnerable or because their child's needs mean they cannot adhere to social distancing and safe practice.
Headteachers at more than 200 schools and colleges in England told researchers the government's guidance had been unclear and showed a lack of understanding of how special schools work, the types of pupils they support, and how much they rely on other key services including healthcare and local charities.
Amy Skipp, the director of ASK Research, who led the project, said: "Heads and parents told us repeatedly how they felt forgotten about. Messages from government and the issued guidance have been so confused for children with special needs who faced an impossible situation over the last few months."
Skipp said those children would often not be able to access the support they needed despite schools reopening.
"Parents should not be being asked to choose between their child's health and their education," Skipp said.
"Many special schools have shown amazing innovation and commitment during lockdown with staff going above and beyond to help these families. Government should learn from what has worked, and reflect this level of commitment by acting now, making specific guidance for these settings and providing the additional resources they will need."
Tulip Siddiq, the shadow children's minister, said: "There are serious concerns that this lack of Send support could lead to some children having to miss out on vital education and a rise in school exclusions. This would be a devastating outcome for children with Send, many of whom have seen their physical and mental health deteriorate in recent months.
"Ministers must work harder to ensure that all children can get back to school safely. That means providing better support and guidance so that the needs of vulnerable children and those with Send can be met in all schools."
A survey by the University of Sussex found the parents and carers of children with special needs said their children appeared less stressed and anxious at home during lockdown, compared with when they were at school.
Three out of five parent carers felt their child was less stressed, as lockdown allowed greater time spent with families and increased one-to-one contact, while removing the pressures of school, such as wearing uniform or experiences with bullies.
But the study also found that four out of 10 parents felt they received no support from government agencies during lockdown, and also felt their Send children had been forgotten.
Jacqui Shepherd, a lecturer in education at Sussex, said for Send children returning to school this month "it must be phased and gradual with priority given to routines, wellbeing and social aspects of education ahead of academic pressures".
A DfE spokesperson said: "Throughout the pandemic we have worked with schools and councils to help support children with Send including by asking schools to stay open to those with education health and care plans. At the same time, we are increasing high needs funding for local authorities by £780m this year and a further £730 million next year, boosting the total budget to more than £8bn in 2021-22.
"We know that the staff who work day in, day out with these children and their families understand their individual needs best, and that they have put in place any necessary adjustments to ensure a smooth transition back to school. We have provided specific guidance on the measures special schools and other special education settings should put in place to keep children and staff as safe as possible."