Everyday Heroes: key workers celebrated at Southbank, where hundreds face sack
Southbank Centre, London Artists' heartfelt tributes to friends and relatives who battled through the Covid pandemic make a striking outdoor portrait show, even as the arts centre's own workers face redundancies
What is a hero? Aristotle writes of "superhuman virtue, a heroic and divine kind of virtue" that is the counterbalance to brutishness. But heroic virtue is not the stuff of the everyday, he warns: "It is rarely that a godlike man is found."
Brutish times, apparently, breed the heroes required to meet them. Those caring for the sick, the old, the young, who keep buses circulating, shops stocked, and waste disposed of. These are the Everyday Heroes portrayed – in image and verse – in this open-air exhibition at the Southbank Centre in London.
The scale and arrangement is smart. Poems, paintings and photographs printed at "heroic" proportions, are installed on three levels around the site. In place of the robber barons, warrior princes and colonial profiteers who survey other public spaces from elevated plinths, here we are looked over by nurses, shopkeepers and religious leaders.
Artist Mahtab Hussain draws out this parallel explicitly, ennobling his surgeon and doctor in gold leaf, evoking veneration of various kinds. Cradling her newborn, Dr A Shahid with Ember bears the radiant halo of a holy icon. Seated in billowing scrubs arranged like courtly robes, The Surgeon carries his tools like spear or sword.
It is always exciting to see new work by Michael Armitage. This most inventive painter engages thoughtfully with the site in a group portrait that recalls muralist traditions. In a flame-like lozenge at the centre, the heads and bodies of four refuse collectors blend in a welter of motion, reaching, hauling, emptying. Their names – John Barry, O Kelly, Sonny and Richard Moore – are inscribed alongside, like fallen heroes honoured by their community on a painted wall. Above them, paramedics load a gurney into an ambulance. Perched in the foreground are masks of comedy and tragedy: pointedly apposite for the shuttered building it adorns.
Women's work has long interested Caroline Walker. In the past she has painted neon-lit nail bar workers, the unseen diligence of hotel cleaners, and cafe staff mopping up. Here she offers Elaine, working at a local bakery, eyes twinkling above her mask as she reaches for a loaf with gloved hand.
This is the new pandemic aesthetic. Masks, of course, and dangling bottles of hand gel. Beneath the soft glow of a market canopy, the mask worn by Benjamin Senior's grocer is now part of the comfort the painting offers: a careful man, amid his resplendent cabbages and sweet tumbling pumpkins.
At first glance something seems amiss with Lydia Blakeley's Tom at the Counter. He's all fuzzy and flat: the effect of the acrylic screen that mediates interaction in cafes and shops. We can see Tom smiling, but his face is cut about with reflected striplights bouncing off the plastic separating us.
The open, friendly gaze of Rehanah Sadiq shines through the visor of this hospital chaplain's full PPE kit in Matthew Krishanu's multi-part study of female religious leaders in Birmingham, a portrait of faith in adversity. We see prison chaplain Deseta Davis leading a sparsely attended funeral. Rabbi Margaret Jacobi takes a quiet moment at home. Church of England vicar Eve Pitts leads a procession outdoors, continuing her devotions in the open air.
Armitage's painting is a grand statement, three metres high. Krishanu's are tiny: intimate and diaristic. There is more to painting than image, and that is lost when they are presented like this. But needs must. There are some moving portraits here, not least Barbara Walker's affectionate drawings of her nurse friend Rosemary, and Ryan Mosley's intense painting of his train-driver brother, lit in an electric glow of teal and tangerine.
There are, importantly, some cynical voices. Both Vanessa Kisuule's poem Scrunchie and Jeremy Deller's portrait of the UK in 2020 – titled An Immigrant Saving a Racist's Life x 500,000 – remind us this is not a straightforward story of everyday heroes. The pandemic has its elite villains, too. It is disingenuous to glorify everyday heroes without acknowledging the origins of the brutishness they combat. The government's leap to dub frontline workers heroes obscured the unpreparedness, incompetence, muddled leadership and legacy of austerity they contend with. As Deller suggests, we might throw xenophobic hostility into that mix, too.
Cognitive dissonance infects our cultural sector. Turner prize-winner Tai Shani wrote blisteringly this week about the "bewildering ethical paradoxes of the art world" in which an "expansionist, market and state-driven managerial approach" is cloaked in a facade of liberal centrism.
Southbank Centre employees are currently protesting threatened redundancies. Some 400 jobs are on the line, overwhelmingly among the organisation's lowest-paid sectors, including the very same front-facing roles celebrated in the portraits quite literally cloaking the complex's facades. It displays brass neck in the extreme for an organisation to glorify key workers so publicly at the very moment it threatens its own with redundancy.
Everyday Heroes is at Southbank Centre, London, until November.