Pandemic may have hastened non-Covid deaths in England and Wales
ONS study shows 12,774 more deaths above five-year average between 7 March and 1 May
The deaths of thousands of people in England and Wales may have been hastened at the height of the coronavirus pandemic although their deaths were not registered as Covid-19 related.
More than 96,000 non-Covid-19 deaths were registered between 7 March and 1 May 2020, 12,774 more than the five-year average, or 15.3%. A further 33,602 Covid-19 deaths occurred in the same period.
However, from that date to 10 July, non-Covid-19 deaths were 6% below the average.
The analysis by the Office for National Statistics says the increase in deaths for some groups in the earlier of these two periods, followed by a reduction in deaths in the latter period, may be due to some deaths having been "brought forward", something they refer to in its analysis as "mortality displacement".
However, the ONS cautioned that not all non-Covid-19 excess deaths will have been hastened because of the pandemic and that some will be down to a lower-than-average number of deaths occurring earlier in the year.
The analysis shows that, since the end of July, the number of people dying at home from non-Covid-19 causes is now greater than the total number of Covid-19 deaths.
Deaths in private homes (a personal residence) are still occurring above five-year average levels; since the week ending 26 July, there have been more excess (above average) non-Covid-19 deaths in private homes than Covid-19 deaths in all settings (hospitals, care homes, private homes and others combined) each week.
The ONS's head of health index and projections, Greg Ceely, said the difference may be a sign people have been delaying their access to care.
"Some of the causes involved in these deaths are conditions which can be quickly fatal without treatment if earlier symptoms aren't treated. These include the heart and circulatory-related conditions, diabetes, appendicitis etc, most of which occurred at above average levels [between 7 March and 1 May].
"Another explanation for these non-Covid increases is undiagnosed Covid," he added.The trend was most evident in people aged 80 or over. The cohort had the greatest increase in non-Covid-19 mortality between mid-March and early May but which subsequently experienced the largest decreases in non-Covid-19 mortality from May to 10 July, compared with the five-year average.Most leading causes of death that increased between 7 March and 1 May – including dementia and Alzheimer's, and chronic lower respiratory diseases – have since returned to levels more consistent with the start of the year.Some underlying causes of death that were recorded earlier in the year remain above five-year average levels, including deaths involving diabetes, hypertensive diseases, and several heart-related conditions such as cardiac arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy.
The focus on non-Covid deaths was important, said David Leon, professor of epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, "as it directly addresses the concern about 'collateral' damage due to the massive reduction in the normal functioning of the NHS during the pandemic".
He added: "What is really striking is that in percentage terms the two causes of death that showed the largest increases are those that are of ill-defined [ie the actual reason for death is unclear) and dementias."This may be consistent with an important proportion of 'non-Covid' deaths in the first part of the pandemic actually due to undiagnosed Covid-19. Further investigation of this possibility, especially in care homes has to be a priority."
Separate figures released by the ONS on Wednesday morning showed 52,217 deaths involving coronavirus had occurred in England and Wales to 21 August.
Figures published last week by the National Records for Scotland showed that 4,222 deaths involving Covid-19 had been registered in Scotland up to 23 August, while 871 deaths had occurred in Northern Ireland up to 21 August (and had been registered up to 26 August), according to the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency.
Taken together, 57,310 deaths have been registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate, including suspected cases.
The total number of deaths registered in England and Wales in the week ending 21 August was higher than the five-year average. This was for the second week running after eight consecutive weeks of below-average death figures.
However, the number of excess deaths registered in the week ending 21 August (474 deaths higher than the average) was not driven by Covid-19.
In Wales, 11 deaths involving Covid-19 were registered in that week, down from 14 deaths in a week earlier.