John Roberts sides with supreme court liberals over Nevada church Covid opening
In a 5-4 ruling the court denied a church's request to strike down 50-person cap on services due to pandemic
Chief Justice John Roberts again sided with the liberals on the US supreme court on Friday, as it denied a rural Nevada church's request to strike down a 50-person cap on worship services as part of the state's response to the coronavirus pandemic.
Roberts, a conservative appointed by George W Bush, has sided with the four liberal justices on recent rulings regarding abortion, immigration and LGBTQ+ rights. Observers have pointed to his votes in other cases while cautioning that he has not necessarily changed his stripes.
In a 5-4 decision on Friday, the court refused to grant a request from Calvary Chapel Dayton Valley, east of Reno, to be subjected to the same Covid-19 restrictions that allow casinos, restaurants and other businesses to operate at 50% of capacity with proper social distancing.
The church argued that a hard cap on religious gatherings was an unconstitutional violation of first amendment rights to express and exercise beliefs.
Roberts did not explain his vote. Three justices wrote strongly worded dissenting opinions on behalf of the four other conservatives who said they would have granted injunctive relief while the court fully considers the merits of the case.
"That Nevada would discriminate in favor of the powerful gaming industry and its employees may not come as a surprise, but this court's willingness to allow such discrimination is disappointing," Justice Samuel Alito wrote in a dissent joined by Justices Clarence Thomas and Brett Kavanaugh.
"We have a duty to defend the constitution, and even a public health emergency does not absolve us of that responsibility. The constitution guarantees the free exercise of religion. It says nothing about freedom to play craps or blackjack, to feed tokens into a slot machine or to engage in any other game of chance."
Kavanaugh also wrote his own dissent, as did Justice Neil Gorsuch, who said today's world "with a pandemic upon us, poses unusual challenges".
"But there is no world in which the constitution permits Nevada to favor Caesars Palace over Calvary Chapel," Gorsuch wrote.
The church wants to allow as many as 90 people to attend services – with masks required, sitting 6ft apart – at a building with a capacity of 200.
But lawyers for the Nevada state government said last week several courts nationwide have followed the supreme court's lead in upholding state authority to impose emergency restrictions in response to Covid-19.
Secular businesses in Nevada that are allowed to operate at half-capacity include gyms, hair salons, bowling alleys and water parks.
Alito said that by allowing thousands to gather in casinos, the state cannot claim to have a compelling interest in limiting religious gatherings to 50 people – regardless of the size of the facility and measures adopted to prevent the spread of the virus.
"The idea that allowing Calvary Chapel to admit 90 worshipers present a greater public health risk than allowing casinos to operate at 50% capacity is hard to swallow," he wrote.
Kavanaugh said: "Covid-19 is not a blank check for a state to discriminate against religious people, religious organizations and religious services. Nevada is discriminating against religion."