Global report: Red Cross warns of big post-Covid-19 migration as WHO hits back at US
WHO chief says Pompeo made 'untrue' comments; US passes 4m cases as Trump cancels part of Republican convention; Melbourne records 300 new cases
The coronavirus crisis could spark huge waves of fresh migration once borders reopen, the head of the Red Cross has warned. It comes as the WHO's chief accused the US of making "untrue" and "unacceptable" claims against the global health body.
The head of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), Jagan Chapagain, said he was deeply concerned about the secondary effects of the pandemic, as border closures and Covid-19 restrictions have driven millions into poverty.
"Increasingly we are seeing in many countries the impacts on the livelihoods and the food situation," he said in an interview with Agence France-Presse.
Many people are already faced with the choice of risking exposure to the novel coronavirus or going hungry, Chapagain said, warning that the desperation being generated could have far-reaching consequences.
"What we hear is that many people who are losing livelihoods, once the borders start opening, will feel compelled to move," he said. "We should not be surprised if there is a massive impact on migration in the coming months and years."
Chapagain called for immediate support to relieve people's desperation and warned that increased migration would result in numerous "tragedies along the way", including deaths at sea, human trafficking and exploitation.
"The cost of supporting the migrants, during the transit and of course when they reach the country of destination, is much more than supporting people in their livelihoods, education, health needs in their own country," he said.
Chapagain also condemned efforts in some countries to secure vaccines for their own people first: "The virus crosses the border, so it is pretty short-sighted to think that I vaccinate my people but leave everybody else without vaccination, and we will still be safe," he said.
The warnings came as the head of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, strongly criticised the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, after British media reported that US's top diplomat had made a comment about the health agency chief having been bought by China.
"The comments are untrue and unacceptable, and without any foundation for that matter," Tedros said. "If there is one thing that really matters to us and which should matter to the entire international community, it's saving lives. And WHO will not be distracted by these comments."
Pompeo, meanwhile, gave a speech on Thursday in California, calling on "free nations" to triumph over the threat of what he said was a "new tyranny" from China.
President Trump cancelled part of the Republican national convention in Florida, as his country passed 4m Covid-19 infections and nearly a million new cases have been reported in the past two weeks. It was the starkest example yet of Trump bowing to the scientific reality of the pandemic, which has taken more than 1,000 American lives on each of the past three days.
The president acknowledged in his daily press briefing that hot spots may need to delay reopening schools by a few weeks, but otherwise pushed for students to be able to return to classrooms en masse in the fall. It came as the Centers for Disease Control echoed his words, issuing a new statement on the importance of reopening schools: "Covid-19 poses low risks to school-aged children, at least in areas with low community transmission," the CDC said.
In Australia, the second largest city of Melbourne recorded another 300 cases of coronavirus in the worst local outbreak of the pandemic. The most populous state of New South Wales reimposed stricter measures on gatherings, reducing the number of people allowed at some events.
It came as the country's prime minister, Scott Morrison reaffirmed its suppression strategy against the pandemic:"The goal of that is obviously, and has always been no community transmission," he said.
"There will always be cases that come because Australia has not completely shut itself off from the world."
In other coronavirus developments:
China reported 21 new coronavirus cases, down from 22 cases a day earlier, the health commission said on Friday. Of the new infections, 13 were in the far western region of Xinjiang. The ATP tennis tour cancelled its 2020 China tournament, due to the pandemic.
A top health expert in Hong Kong has said the current wave of Covid-19 infections was brought in from outside of Hong Kong, most likely by people exempted from mandatory quarantine. Gabriel Leung, dean of the faculty of medicine at the University of Hong Kong, counter government' assertions that exemptions were not behind the surge.
Mexico reported a record 8,438 new confirmed cases of coronavirus infection and 718 additional fatalities, bringing the total in the country to 370,712 cases and 41,908 total deaths.
New Zealand beat Covid-19 by citizens trusting their leaders and following advice, a new study has shown. 80% of people surveyed said they adopted frequent hand-washing behaviours, while 9 out of 10 said they practised social distancing.
The image on this article was changed on 14 August 2020. An earlier version had shown an image of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), rather than the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC).