US surpasses 4m Covid-19 cases as states dial back reopening
More than 1,100 new coronavirus-related deaths reported in a single day as Fauci says he doesn't 'really see us eradicating it'
The US surpassed 4m coronavirus cases on Thursday, after more than 1,100 new Covid-19-related deaths were reported in a single day on Wednesday for the first time since late May.
As states continue to dial back reopening efforts, nearly every metric for tracking the outbreak has shown a worsening spread.
"I don't see this disappearing," Dr Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told tuberculosis researchers during a live stream on Wednesday. "It is so efficient in its ability to transmit from human to human that I think we ultimately will get control of it. I don't really see us eradicating it."
More than 915,000 new cases have been confirmed in just the past two weeks, totaling more than the entire month of June. The US has now exceeded 140,000 deaths, with Texas alone reporting a state record 197 new fatalities on Wednesday.
Hospitalizations have also increased as the Associated Press reports testing facilities have been overwhelmed by the surge, creating processing delays. Some patients have waited weeks, fueling fears that asymptomatic carriers could be spreading the virus while waiting for their results.
In Florida, the nation's largest hotspot, cases rose by nearly 35% in the days since the state started releasing that data. At least 53 hospitals in 27 counties confirmed running out of beds in their ICUs, with more than 9,500 people hospitalized statewide.
On Wednesday, California surpassed New York state's previous record for the highest number of aggregate cases in the country, with more than 12,800 Californians testing positive. State health officials noted the pace and depth of the surge complicates efforts to track the coronavirus's spread.
"At the level of transmission we're seeing across the state, even a very, very robust contact tracing team in every single county will have a hard time reaching out to every case," Dr Mark Ghaly, health and human services secretary, said in a press conference. "No one has anticipated building a program to contact trace the level of cases we're seeing here."
The surge has wreaked havoc across the sun belt, a region of the US composed of the south and south-west. The White House coronavirus response coordinator, Dr Deborah Birx, pinpointed early state reopenings and Memorial Day for the surge.
"We saw wide virus spread across counties, across rural areas, across small metros and big metros, all the way across the south, south-west and west, almost simultaneously," she told Fox News.
But at his latest coronavirus briefing, Donald Trump rejected criticism of his administration and Republican-led states' response to the outbreak, insisting "there are likely a number of causes for the spike".
The president first blamed Black Lives Matters protests and immigrants from Mexico before pivoting to popular American holidays and the young.
Although people of color are disproportionately contracting and dying of the virus, many studies have debunked racist conspiracies about the virus's origin and its spread, linking the surge to relaxed stay-at-home orders and parties instead.
Meanwhile, as the number of new unemployment claims rose to 1.4m last week, the White House, along with Republican senators, is set to unveil an estimated $1tn coronavirus relief package meant to soften the blow of business closures and layoffs amid the pandemic.