A devoted geriatrician, an addiction counselor: US healthcare workers who died from Covid-19
We are documenting the lives of every US medical worker who dies helping patients during the pandemic. These are just a few of hundreds of cases
Lost on the frontline is a collaboration between the Guardian and Kaiser Health News that aims to document the lives of healthcare workers in the US who die from Covid-19, and to understand why so many are falling victim to the pandemic.
Each week, we're documenting new cases of healthcare workers who have died on the frontlines of the coronavirus pandemic. Here are their stories:
Occupation: Therapist and group facilitatorPlace of work: Impact drug and alcohol treatment center in Pasadena, CaliforniaDate of death: 27 April 2020
Growing up in East Los Angeles, Vivian Fierro was driven. "She raised the bar far beyond what [our parents] hoped for her," said her younger brother, David.
Vivian excelled at basketball and earned a degree at East Los Angeles college. But she also struggled with addiction.
She became sober in her late 20s and parlayed that experience into a career, becoming a certified drug and alcohol counselor. She also specialized in counseling LGBTQ clients.
She was the kind of person who, upon hearing someone was facing eviction, might offer to pay their rent, her brother said. Fierro traveled up and down the California coast, speaking at large 12-step conventions and small, out-of-the-way meetings.
Vivian had been sober for nearly 31 years when she died at home from Covid-19. It is unclear where she contracted the virus, but her workplace shut down to sanitize after employees and clients had tested positive, David said. Her employer did not respond to requests for comment.
"Vivian was considered different," David said, and taught others who had been marginalized by their addictions or sexuality that being different was OK. "She just wanted to know how she could help you."
– Jessica Klein
Occupation: GeriatricianPlace of work: Providence Rest in the Bronx, New YorkDate of death: 26 April 2020
Jeffrey Escher enjoyed working with the elderly. "Helping people age gracefully," he believed, was a perfect description for his career, said his son Max Escher.
Before Jeffrey died, he sent his son photos of personal protective equipment he wore while seeing patients at the nursing home. They depicted surgical masks and a face shield, but Jeffrey expressed concern that his colleagues might not have sufficient PPE.
"He was always concerned for others instead of himself," Max said. Jeffrey's employer, TeamHealth, declined to comment.
Jeffrey played in a local jazz band and was actively involved with his temple. During the Jewish high holy days, he played the shofar, an ancient musical horn, according to his obituary.
After developing Covid-19 symptoms in April, he stopped working and was tested. Jeffrey, who lived with his wife, Monique Brion, died before the results came back positive.
"His idea of being a doctor was not focusing on a specific part of the body but focusing on the patient in total … and listening to their stories," Max said.
– Jessica Klein