Covid-19 will devastate poorest nations if west does not act, warns UN
G20 told to 'step up now or pay price later' as up to 100 million globally face being pushed into extreme poverty
The west's shortsighted response to the impact of Covid-19 could result in 640 million people being infected and 1.7 million killed in the world's poorest countries, the UN warned.
The direct medical costs of treating 2.2 million patients in hospital critical care beds could amount to an estimated $16.28bn, while the focus on coronavirus could also lead to a diversion of scarce health resources, leading to a further 1.7 million preventable deaths from HIV, TB and malaria.
The findings – prepared for the UN by the economics department at Oxford – are designed as a call to arms as G20 finance ministers prepare to meet this weekend.
UN officials are deeply concerned that as the pandemic recedes in Europe, the impacts of the virus and of the global recession on the world's poorest are already being forgotten.
Much of the projected poverty worldwide will come from social distancing measures put in place to reduce deaths but liable to devastate local economies.
The UN emergency relief coordinator, Mark Lowcock, warned: "Covid-19 and the associated global recession are about to wreak havoc in fragile and low-income countries. My message is that unless the rich countries and the G20 are prepared to act now we must be prepared for a series of human tragedies more brutal and destructive than any direct impacts in the virus itself. If the virus is free to circle the globe it will undo decades of development work and create a generation's worth of tragic and exportable problems."
Lowcock's warning came as he launched a third appeal for a coronavirus humanitarian response, saying the updated plan needed $10.3bn, up from an initial appeal for $2bn in March.
The appeal is intended to help 63 vulnerable countries and 200 million people, compared with the 108 million that the UN had been planning to target at the start of the year before the epidemic. Some of the money is designed to keep frontline NGOs afloat, as well as cover UN transportation made necessary by the collapse of civilian airlines.
Altogether, the sum represents the single largest appeal ever made in the 75-year history of the UN. Officials are hoping humanitarian aid will be included in the EU seven-year budget framework and in the planned US stimulus budget.
Lowcock said that the first UN appeal in March had so far raised only $1.7bn, and pointed to a decline in generosity from Gulf countries this year. He described the response by most wealthy countries as "grossly inadequate" and "dangerously short-sighted".
He added: "My message to the G20 is step up now or pay the price later." The contrast between the effectiveness and energy that went into the global response at the time of the financial crisis in 2008 was striking and dangerous, he said.
He said the overall long-term cost of protecting the poorest 32 countries was $90bn – less than 1% of the cost of the wealthy west's various stimulus packages – and argued that if the world's poorest countries were not protected the chances would increase of a second wave of the virus sweeping back into Europe, leading to possible output loss of £1.1tn in the advanced economies.
Overall, he warned the virus might cause the first absolute rise in poverty since 1990, with 70-100 million people pushed into the extreme poverty category of less than $1.90 income a day and a possible doubling of those facing famine.
The Oxford report also suggests that a school shutdown spanning five months could generate learning losses that have a present value of $10tn globally.
Without remediation the average student could face a reduction of $16,000 in earnings over a lifetime in present value terms. At a macro scale, 16% of global investments made in the basic education of the current cohort could go to waste.
Lowcock also said that school closures in turn affected human nutrition, pointing to Nigeria where school closures had reduced the food intake of nearly 7 million children enrolled in the country's school feeding programme.
The economy of sub-Saharan Africa is predicted to contract by -3.2%; that of the Middle East and central Asia by -4.7%, Latin America and the Caribbean by -9.4% and low- and middle-income countries in Asia by -0.8%, largely swayed by China's growth projection of 1%.
The UN report said these projections reflected the broadest collapse in per-capita income since 1870. "Nevertheless, these annualised GDP projections fail to capture the extent to which millions of people will experience transient poverty in response to Covid-19. In the absence of social security to smooth this shock, income losses of these magnitudes will have severe consequences for the livelihoods and wellbeing of people."