Australia did not consider pandemic risk in medical stockpile planning, audit finds
Report says procurement amid pandemic was satisfactory but government had not planned ahead for PPE need
The government did not consider the risk of a pandemic while amassing its strategic reserve of medical supplies in the years prior to Covid-19, an audit has found.
The unprecedented Covid-19 crisis put global strain on supplies of personal protective equipment, testing components, and other medical suppliessuch as ventilators.
In Australia, an emergency reserve of masks, gowns, medicines and other medical equipment is held in a series of secret locations as part of the country's national medical stockpile.
The auditor general on Thursday released a report examining the management of the national medical stockpile, both in the years before the pandemic and during the crisis, when the government made mass purchases to bolster supplies of PPE, ventilators and testing equipment.
The audit found that before the pandemic, the stockpile was worth about $123m. Since the beginning of the crisis, about $3.23bn was given to health to procure PPE and medical equipment. The department entered into 54 contracts for PPE, medical equipment and test kits, and about 1.3bn items of PPE were procured.
The audit found the government's procurement of medical supplies during the pandemic was largely satisfactory, either meeting or exceeding the procurement requirements.
But it also warned of several shortcomings in the government's approach. It found that, in planning the stockpile in recent years, the government had not considered the risk of a pandemic or its "implications for stockpiling PPE".
"Threat assessments to inform NMS procurement planning in the two years leading to the Covid-19 pandemic were primarily focused on [chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear] threats," the audit found. "There is no evidence that the risk of a pandemic from a pathogen such as coronavirus informed NMS procurement priorities."
The audit also warned of poor information sharing with the states and territories, which hold their own stockpiles.
It found stockpile information was "not adequately shared" and that agreements with the states about stockpiling responsibilities were "not documented".
The audit also warned of a lack of protocols for emergency procurements.
It made four recommendations to the Department of Health, which were aimed at improving planning by basing procurement on "key strategic risks" and improving collaboration with states and territories.
The government was also urged to develop a mechanism for sharing stockpile information between jurisdictions that would allow the "sharing of information between jurisdictions about stockpile inventories that will function in both business as usual and emergency conditions".
The department agreed with all recommendations. In its response to the audit, the department said the pandemic was a once-in-a-century event that had "put incredible pressure on Australia's health system, especially its health professionals".
The department said it had released from the stockpile more than 78m masks, 43m of which went to the states and territories and 19m to aged care, and millions of gloves and goggles.
"Australia has not, during this pandemic, been in a position where clinically recommended PPE has not been able to be supplied to a health worker," the department said. "This is not the case for many other countries in the world."
In a second audit released on Thursday, the auditor general also assessed the response of Services Australia to the pandemic.
That audit found the department was "largely effective in managing the risks related to the rapid preparation for and delivery of Covid-19 economic response measures".