I feel like I'm fighting for my future. It's exhausting being young
Navigating the world when you're unemployed, says Michelle Lim, feels like being in a maze. She is one of a generation of young Australians whose lives are being shaped by Covid
Name: Michelle Lim
Age: 23
Dreams of: Being a social worker
What a time to be alive for us young people. Even though I'm 23, I think I've had a lifetime worth of experiences. Never has there been so much uncertainty. When I think about dreams interrupted, I think about things that could have or should have been – a job, friends in my new course and new volunteering opportunities.
When I was in primary school, I wanted to become a chef. In high school, I wanted to become a politician. In Year 12, I wanted to become a diplomat. In my first year of university, I wanted to work for the United Nations. I'm studying to be a social worker now. I decided to move into social work because I want to make tangible change in people's lives and society, helping those vulnerable, marginalised and looked over by other services. This doesn't mean I've closed doors to all those other careers. I'm young. I have plenty of time, as they say.
After I graduated from my bachelor's of global studies last year, I struggled to find employment, whether it was a graduate job, casual or part-time. All my friends were still in university in their fourth year of their six-year degrees. I found myself alone. Being young and having to cope with unemployment and uncertainty about my future was daunting and terrifying. My parents were disappointed in me, but most of all, I was disappointed in myself.
Navigating the world when you're young and unemployed feels like being in a maze. A maze with a time bomb and hurdles to jump, too. It's a strange world to live in. I'm too young for some jobs, I'm too old for others. We're told to follow our dreams, but society tells us that we're too radical and inexperienced. Self-care is pushed on to us like a trendy commodity but when we need a break, we feel unproductive and worthless. It's exhausting to be young.
Alongside my passion for social justice, I chose to study a masters of social work in the hope of securing some realistic prospects for employment. I feel there was no choice but to move into further education. It was either continue to apply for jobs and volunteer while being unemployed, or apply for a further postgraduate study to improve my job prospects.
When I received the offer for my masters in May, the pandemic was already in full swing and I was hesitant to study. I'd heard of the difficulties of online learning. I am an extrovert and starting at a new university online with no friends would be difficult. Theoretically, online classes sound great. Saves on time, money and emissions by not travelling. But sometimes when I enter into my online tutorials, all I see are blank stares and tired students. Zoom fatigue is real. Sometimes I dread my next two-hour tutorial.
Still, with university and volunteering I had some structure back in my life. There was, however, a sense of calm before the storm. Like cicadas before it rains. The pandemic gave me a sense of ease in some ways. There was comfort that we, humanity, could just all do nothing and it was OK. During the peak of lockdown, it was desolate on Seek, with only two pages worth of vacancies, yet a weird sense of tranquility had washed over me. Large-scale unemployment meant that I was not the only one in the boat anymore. But there was also anxiety; as the pandemic subsided, I was worried that I would be left behind again.
The coronavirus Centrelink supplement definitely made an impact, easing the financial burden on my parents. Yes, I do live in my parent's home and I also don't pay rent. But culturally, it's always been this way. When this article goes up, I know some people will say that my despair can be lifted if I worked "hard enough" to find a job. But there are also many young people out there in the same position I am, and they can tell you that our struggles and feelings are valid too.
Like many families, my family has been kept apart during this period. My dad is overseas, while my mum has chosen to stay here in Melbourne with my sister and me. Although I come from a background of privilege, I still come from a single-income family. Unemployment is a possibility that's always at the back of my mind. Unemployment crosses national boundaries. What if my dad got sick overseas? He'd be all alone. What if his company decided to fire him? Would we have to sell our house and move in with my grandparents? It's unfair but then again, we live in an unfair world.
It is just one uncertainty in a world of uncertainties. As I think about the future, there are lots of questions. Will the employment situation get better for me? Probably not. Am I still fighting for my future? Yes.
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.