NSW police error to blame over two overseas travellers failing to quarantine
All travellers on Virgin flight 838 from Sydney to Melbourne on Saturday directed to isolate at home immediately and contact DHHS
A police error allowed two German travellers to fly from Sydney to Melbourne without quarantine, an act that prompted alarm in Victoria and potentially put a planeload of 176 people at risk.
On Saturday, two German travellers, a 53-year-old and 15-year-old, arrived in Sydney on an international flight from Tokyo, but did not quarantine before boarding a domestic flight to Melbourne as required.
The travellers were stopped at Melbourne airport through "some good fortune", after an airport employee, understood to be a security guard, noticed something was amiss. They are now completing their quarantine in Victoria, inadvertently becoming the first occupants of Victoria's reset hotel quarantine system.
The pair's ability to travel freely from Sydney prompted immediate questions and some frustration within the Victorian government, which is only now properly emerging from tough restrictions after 37 days free of the virus.
On Sunday afternoon, New South Wales police revealed that their officers were to blame. After being directed to board a bus to go to hotel quarantine, the pair told NSW police that they'd already been booked on a flight to Melbourne.
Police "made inquiries as to travel and exemptions" and allowed the pair to travel to Melbourne as "exempt travellers".
"On arrival in Melbourne, Victoria Health advised NSW Health that the pair were not in possession of an approved exemption and had been escorted to hotel quarantine, where they remain," NSW police said in a statement.
"The NSW police force has since conducted a review into the circumstances of the incident and identified police had incorrectly allowed the two travellers to proceed to Melbourne."
"Police practices and systems at the airport have also been reviewed and strengthened as a result of this incident."
Deputy police commissioner Jeff Loy said the error was the result of confusion and a language barrier. The police officer – who was on his second shift with the operation – didn't check the exemption forms and paperwork properly.
"He's a very good officer, a fine officer, someone who is very remorseful about the mistake that he's made," Loy said. "But the mistake has been rectified, reviewed, we'll move on, and I hope he moves on to have a prosperous career as well, because he's a very good officer."
Loy said police had deal with more than 100,000 people during its returned traveller operation, which had relied on 28,000 police shifts since March. He noted this was the only time a mistake had been made.
"It's not a good look, but two out of 100,000 – this operation has allowed the economy of NSW to continue."
No action will be taken against either the travellers of the officer.
Earlier, Victoria's health minister, Martin Foley, said he had sought an explanation from his New South Wales counterpart and had been assured there would be a "full investigation".
Foley praised the employee at Melbourne airport who noticed something was wrong.
"That employee has done an amazing job and we are very grateful to them and hopefully they are suitably honoured by their employer and if they don't, we certainly will," he said.
He said initial tests of the two travellers had returned a negative result for Covid-19. The pair will be tested again tomorrow.
"However, that's not over because what we have to do is because of the incubation period process, keep those people in quarantine, and they will be in quarantine for the next two weeks," he said.
The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said on Sunday he had directed Australian Border Force to investigate the matter.
Hunt, though, said the pair were picked up by a "failsafe" deliberately built into the border control system.
"There are multiple rings of containment within the quarantine and border system and, ultimately, these passengers have been picked up within those rings of containment," Hunt told Sky News on Sunday.
The ABF released a statement after Hunt's comments, saying it only had responsibility for clearing travellers for entry into the country. What happened after that, it said, was a matter for state and territory authorities.
"These passengers met all customs and immigration requirements," the statement said, before referring further questions to NSW Health.
The case has also prompted a warning from Victoria's health department that anyone who was on Virgin Airways flight VA 838 from Sydney at midday AEDT and arriving in Melbourne at 1.25pm on Saturday should "immediately quarantine at home and contact DHHS".
There were 176 people on the flight, including 170 passengers and four cabin crew and two pilots. The vast majority of those have already been contacted by health authorities.
"Anyone who has been at the Melbourne airport domestic terminal on Saturday afternoon is advised to monitor for Covid-19 symptoms and to seek testing if symptoms develop," the department said.
A further five staff who spoke with the travellers at Melbourne airport have also been identified as close contacts. They have been told to quarantine.
Victoria has been free of locally transmitted coronavirus cases for more than a month and with no active cases has effectively eradicated the virus.
Victoria recorded its 37th consecutive day on Sunday of no new virus cases.
The state's impressive zero-case run is about to be put to the test as international arrivals, initially capped at 160 a day, resume.
Five international flights from Colombo, Doha, Hong Kong and Singapore are scheduled to arrive at Melbourne airport on Monday, marking the start of the state's revamped hotel quarantine program.
International flights were diverted from Victoria in June after security guards at two quarantine hotels contracted Covid-19.
The outbreaks sparked the state's second wave, which resulted in more than 18,000 infections and 800 deaths.