After a childhood in foster care, I finally felt my life was on track. Then the pandemic hit
Melbourne-based Madeleine Rose thought 2020 was going to be the year her luck turned around. In a new series we meet the generation of young Australians whose lives are being shaped by Covid
Name: Madeleine RoseAge: 22Dreams of: Being a teacher
I will remember New Year's Eve 2019 forever. As everybody made their way down to the city, I was at home, alone, staring into the TV watching the news broadcast. As the clock struck midnight, I could hear the nearby streets fill with the roars of people cheering. Illegal fireworks flung into the air were cascading down, beautiful and shimmering. It was at that moment I took part in an unspoken ritual that everyone does, praying that this year, 2020, would be better.
The year didn't start off the greatest. My housemates vanished one day and didn't pay their share of the rent. Being only 21, I didn't realise this would result in countless emails from the real estate agent asking me to vacate the property. The thought of being homeless scared me. Luckily, with help, I was able to continue living at this house, which has started to feel like home.
I thought to myself, surely things must turn around now.
My life was finally getting on track. I got a job working at a cafe on a casual basis which was perfect with my university course – bachelor of educational studies. I have dreamt of becoming a teacher ever since I was in grade 3 when a teacher pulled me out of class and started teaching me how to read. I was so far behind due to my upbringing that I was failing school, and because of one teacher's devoted efforts to help me I was able to both finish and flourish in school. It was because of her that my life changed and I want to be able to give someone else that same chance. My course is designed in a way where I need to attend only three days a week. This was good as it allowed me to work during my free days.
I can't really explain what it feels like to finally know that you are on track to succeeding at life. My life from the moment I was born was complicated; my mother and father suffered mental health issues and drug problems. It resulted in a really neglectful, dysfunctional environment which on numerous occasions meant from when I was three years of age we'd be on the streets. I remember sleeping on those bus benches, wanting desperately to be warm. It was no wonder DHHS were called. At seven years old, I was placed in long-term foster care. From there I bounced around from family to family, never truly belonging to any. A regular person reaches important milestones at the right age, for example, when a person turns 15 or 16 they would get their first job. I couldn't because I'd always wonder what happened if I had to move to a new house that week.
So when I got the job at the cafe I was excited. I was finally able to not depend on Centrelink and that $467 a fortnight to pay for rent, bills, phone, food, transport and medications. That feeling of being able to save money to go on trips and to be able to afford a games console, makeup, and to go out for dinners without worrying about blowing my budget felt truly astounding. I think the reason why it felt so good was because everyday I would scroll on social media and see things that regular people were doing, that I simply couldn't afford. To have enough money where I could actually partake in these activities instead of watching someone else live their lives – the feeling was almost addictive. Something that really can't be explained.
Then everything changed in March.
Dan Andrews announced that Victoria would go into lockdown, to try to stop the spread of Covid-19. What on earth is Covid, I wondered. Is that different to the coronavirus? Didn't the World Health Organization label it as nothing worse than the flu? I had the flu before and I survived. Surely it can't be that bad, I thought. I couldn't imagine what lockdown would even look like in Australia.
The harsh reality soon came upon me: lockdown means everything gets shut down.
When announcements followed that the government was going to support business to help secure payments for employees I thought, "That's great! I will spend six weeks at home, relaxing, and everything will return to normal." But a week into lockdown I lost my job. Then I found out that the payments secured for employees were not secure for new casuals like me.
To finally be succeeding in life and then to lose something that means so much is like training for months for a marathon, finally getting to the race and being in first place for most of it, only to trip and fall just as the finish line has appeared.
With Centrelink now my only source of income, how can I afford anything? I didn't save when I had the job because I was so excited to earn money. Gosh, I'm so stupid! Applying for jobs online is excruciating. Nowhere is hiring. Nowhere is open.
And now I don't know what I am going to do or what the future holds.