Shower curtains and desk barriers: how US schools are trying to reopen
As schools across the US reopen amid the pandemic, teachers have been posting photos of how their classrooms have changed
As the US school reopening debate rages on, conflicting concerns around the safety of teachers, students and parents; the need for parents to get back to work; and children's development is a lot to balance.
Those concerns, combined with the huge variation in how US states are dealing with Covid-19, means schools are facing some serious stumbling blocks along their way to reopening. Teachers have been posting photos online to show us what schools of the future are looking like. Here's what we learned – but please share your concerns, experiences or projections about what your schools will look like in the comments.
One of the biggest worries about reopening schools has been how to keep students – particularly young children who love to run around, touching everyone and everything – socially distanced and safe. In one school in Florida, physically partitioning students will be the new normal.
While many have complained about US schools being chronically underfunded, Covid-19 has put space constraints on classrooms, meaning that valuable equipment has to be torn out. In this Indiana school, that means saying goodbye to an entire lab.
Desperate times call for desperate measures: for this New York teacher, that means using a shower curtain as a protective covering for the class bookcase.
While school staff are having to be creative to keep everybody safe, they are also having to constantly readjust. In this Florida classroom, one teacher spoke about trying to find a way for her students to see the board when their desks are bracketed by black-framed dividers. "I LOVE teaching but this is not what teaching is supposed to be like," she said.
Teachers have complained about having to buy their own supplies – sometimes even crowdfunding for personal protective equipment (PPE). In this case, a Miami teacher has resorted to buying her own hand soap.
Meanwhile, across the pond, it looks like teachers are also having to get creative: in Falkirk, Scotland, this teacher used police "do not cross" tape to go about designating appropriate space in a classroom – that's certainly one way to go about doing it.
This article was amended on 14 August 2020 to clarify that the teacher who used police tape in a classroom is in Scotland, not the US.