Ousted expert on Florida's Covid plan: 'They're not listening to the scientists'
After she refused to manipulate virus data, Rebekah Jones was fired – and subjected to vicious criticism from the governor. But, she says, she won't be silenced
Cases of Covid-19 in Florida were below 50,000 in May when Rebekah Jones, creator and manager of the state's official coronavirus database, first claimed she was ordered to censor information to justify Governor Ron DeSantis's ambitious reopening plans for the state.
The retribution was swift and brutal.
Jones was fired for insubordination, and subjected to a vitriolic public character assassination by DeSantis, a Republican who is a close ally of Donald Trump, in the presence of Vice-President Mike Pence. DeSantis questioned Jones's qualifications and personality and aired demonstrably false statements about her private life.
To many observers, the governor's strategy looked like a blatant attempt to intimidate and silence a troublesome data scientist obstructing the path to a speedy reopening. If so, it appears to have failed.
Not only was the reopening premature, with the pandemic still intensifying in Florida and this week surpassing half a million confirmed cases, but Jones continues to be a thorn in DeSantis's side.
Since her dismissal, she has set up a rival coronavirus information portal featuring more detail than the state database; filed a whistleblower complaint alleging the Republican governor and Florida department of health habitually lied about the Covid-19 figures; and on Monday launched her latest venture, a state and national reporting database for teachers, parents and students worried about schools reopening safely.
Trump's demand for classrooms to reopen has been echoed loudly by DeSantis, at least until he started backpedalling on a controversial executive order from Florida's department of education last month, and said he would leave the decision to individual school districts.
Meanwhile, Jones continues to speak out.
"There is currently no plan in place across the state for reporting cases in schools, and I think the reopening of schools embodies everything that was wrong about this whole effort," Jones, 31, said in a telephone interview with the Guardian.
"They're not listening to the scientists, they've no plan to release data, to immediately alert staff, parents or students [if there are on-campus cases], they're just going to let everybody fend for themselves."
Jones said her motivation was a determination to bust through what she sees as political interference in critical public health data. She said she was told to manipulate Florida's Covid-19 figures to suggest positivity rates in certain counties were low enough to support reopening.
"From the beginning there was an organized effort to limit the amount of information the public could have. And that came from all different directions, different motivations, but it ended up in the same result, that people are getting very limited amounts of data and information to make choices," she said.
"They never actually denied what I was saying. They said I was insubordinate, that I didn't listen to my superiors, and that was true. They asked me to do something wrong and I didn't do it.
"If I was insubordinate to say I'm not going to manipulate data to say it's safe to reopen when it's not, then yes, I wear insubordination as a badge of honor."
Jones said the experience of having her personal life publicly dissected by DeSantis, in Pence's presence, was "extremely stressful".
The married mother of two, who has degrees in geography and journalism, had an affair with a fellow student several years ago that led to both parties filing legal complaints against each other. DeSantis seized on the episode in his Orlando press conference, saying he had a "zero tolerance policy for sexual harassment" and wrongly stating that Jones was facing an open charge of cyber sexual harassment.
Leon county prosecutors, however, dropped all charges except a misdemeanor cyberstalking accusation over a blog she wrote about the affair, a charge Jones said was deferred.
"I don't think that would ever have been an issue if I was a 50-year-old man warning about data manipulation and speaking publicly, which I hadn't by that point anyway," she said.
"I know the way I look, the fact I'm a young female scientist, is what drove that. He said I wasn't a scientist, that I wouldn't know how to even look at the data. All the things he was saying were wrong, but he said it with such hatred and anger that, honest to God, I just don't know where it came from.
"The fact he was that angry was scary, honestly, upsetting and disturbing. Having not said a word to the press, having told everyone who contacted me I don't want to be part of the story, and two days later a man I've never been introduced to is speaking about me like somebody he personally knows and hates."
Neither the Florida department of health nor the governor's office responded to requests from the Guardian for comment. Previously DeSantis has been prickly when journalists asked him about Jones, declaring in June they were "chasing the conspiracy bandwagon".
Jones, meanwhile, said she was dismayed by the keenness of officials, particularly the governor and Trump, to eschew the advice of medical and science professionals.
"I've worked in climate science and the challenges of public communication that come with that," she said. "Nobody was ever going to trust us, because we're the people that do data and modeling, they just say we're alarmist.
"But I also always assumed that doctors and nurses are honest people who know what they're talking about when it comes to medicine, the people you would listen to. The silencing of those people caught me off guard. DeSantis's press secretary posted an article that said we'd be at, like, 4,000 deaths by 1 August and said it was ridiculous, yet here we are past 7,000.
"So that's kind of the mentality towards that. When a doctor says hospitals are full and we're not taking enough action, it means hospitals are full and we're not taking action. It's not a point for a political fight."