Covid has exposed weaknesses in Australia's political system but at a fundamental level it's holding up
While we may not like the place we are in, the majority of us seem to trust the government and media to keep us in the loop
As the global pandemic passes 20m infections and nears 750,000 deaths, nations around the world are being forced to confront their particular and unique strengths and weaknesses as they attempt to hold an invisible, voracious enemy at bay.
Like previous pandemics, Covid-19 exerts pressure on health systems, economic frameworks and social compacts, seeking out weaknesses that it will exploit to flourish. Societies that are fragile can break.
In a searing piece published by Rolling Stone this week, the anthropologist Wade Davis chronicles the way the virus "has reduced to tatters the illusion of American exceptionalism".
"At the height of the crisis," Davis writes, "with more than 2,000 dying each day, Americans found themselves members of a failed state, ruled by a dysfunctional and incompetent government largely responsible for death rates that added a tragic coda to America's claim to supremacy in the world."While Covid-19 did not spark US decline, Davis argues that in the culture of individualism that has seen civic purpose abandoned, objective truth compromised and the bonds of mutual reliance weakened, the collective fight against the virus has simply collapsed.
Davis contrasts the US nightmare with the response in Canada, where health systems have proven resilient, and the Scandinavian economies, where higher taxes deliver strong social structures.
As the virus paralyses Victoria and probes for weakness in other Australian states, it's worth considering what the pandemic is telling us about our society.
Here, too, the virus has exposed weaknesses in our system, particularly the deregulation of our labour markers, where the contracting out of essential care workers and the lack of paid sick leave for casual workers have had a material impact on the disease's course.
There is also the constitutional hand-ball of responsibility for elderly people, with a crevasse exposed between the federal aged care system and the state public hospital systems, while the echoes of past cultural wars are exposing the tertiary and arts sector to needless pain.
At a more fundamental level, our institutions and political system are holding up, despite these remarkable and ongoing stresses.
The most obvious manifestation of this is the ongoing support, across partisan lines, for government at both a state and federal levels. Approval of the federal government has been in the mid-60s for months. Even in Victoria, where people are in the centre of a soul-destroying stage-four lockdown, approval of the government's performance is 49-30.
This is a direct product of decisions taken early to work cooperatively through the national cabinet structure, to be led by experts and to collaborate with stakeholders.
As a result of this cooperation, trust in our public institutions has also grown, an ongoing indicator of the social capital at government's disposal. After the apparent early success in suppressing the virus gave way to complications, these sorts of figures could have been expected to subside but, for now, they remain sound.
Trust levels in our health authorities in particular remain high, while even our federal parliament, when it is ready to sit, will do so with heightened levels of public regard.
Indeed, people's receptiveness and response to public messaging has actually been enhanced. While we may not like the place we are in, the vast majority of us feel informed and trust the government and, indeed, the media, to keep us in the loop.
This sense that we are holding ourselves together is reinforced in responses to an online over-time focus group we conducted with Victorians over the past week to get a richer picture of lockdown.
"You will never make everyone happy, but this is a pandemic, a crisis we as individuals, communities and as a country, have never dealt with", one respondent observed. "The Government has some tough decisions to make, I think they are doing well in the decisions and at times wish that maybe they were a little harder, quicker and more forceful, without fear of public uprising. I would hate to be in their shoes and applaud their efforts."
"Absolutely agree," another concurs, "it's so easy to judge but they've had to make some impossible decisions. There is no quick fix and no easy answer to any of this."These are not the usual responses we get to political discussions. For the first time in my experience people are using the pronoun "we" when we ask about government responses. For many Australians, government has ceased to be a partisan construct and has instead become part of their own identity.
If Davis sees the US pulling itself apart under the pressure of the virus, these responses suggest Australians are binding closer themselves together, creating a more resilient society in the process.
To dig deeper into this week's Guardian Essential Report, join Peter Lewis and Katharine Murphy at 1pm on Tuesday for the Australia at Home Political Geekfest
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.