'No one should go hungry': street fridges of free food help Americans survive Covid pandemic
A team of 'fridge-keepers' coordinates donations, keep the fridge safe and sometimes even donate food or money from their own pockets
In May, two months after Marianne Pita recovered from Covid-19, she heard about a fridge set up on a street corner not far from her house in the Bronx. Neighbors and local businesses could donate food – homemade, store-bought, or leftover from a day's sales – and anyone who needed food could take some.
The fridge helps feed people in the middle of a pandemic and mass unemployment – in a year where as many as 54m Americans could need food aid.
There are no strings attached and no questions asked, says Pita.
"Mutual aid means something different than the way welfare works, where you're being quizzed [on your need], because you have to qualify for the aid. You have to be really, really [good]," explains Pita, who volunteers delivering food to local fridges. "And that's not what we're saying."
At least 15 other community fridges have been set up in the five New York boroughs and New Jersey. Los Angeles and Oakland both have networks of community fridges up and running, and grassroots efforts to start community fridges in Houston, Minneapolis, San Francisco, and Miami are taking off.
The idea of community fridges – and more broadly, of free food for all who need it – has been around for decades. More than 50 years ago, the Black Panther Party distributed free breakfast to children out of a local church in the Bronx; a radical program for its time that paved the way for the US government to follow suit in 1975.
Today "there's so many people that are involved as fridge-keepers," says Adela Wagner, 30, who helps with a community fridge in the Crown Heights neighborhood in Brooklyn. They range from those who donate food – bakeries, community gardens, farmers markets and more – to neighbors who keep an eye on it throughout the day. "Most of them are not given credit," Wagner says.
This is their story.
Tatiana Smith, 38, Jersey City, New Jersey: 'I'll host the fridge at my house'
When Tatiana Smith saw a community fridge go up in Brooklyn, followed by others in the Bronx and Harlem, she said, "I want to do that for Jersey." The doula and software product designer started scouting potential locations for a fridge, but initial conversations with local restaurants and businesses were slow. She thought if worse comes to worst, "I'll host it at my house." So she did.
A hot pink fridge with bright blue trim now sits outside her home, with the words "FREE FOOD" and "COMIDA GRATIS" along the top. Neighbors help her watch the fridge, and people come looking for food at all hours of the day. "If you're getting off work at 3am, that's when you can have a meal," Smith says, noting many Black and brown people may work multiple jobs with odd hours.
Smith says she isn't surprised when the food is gone within hours of her posting it on Instagram. "Unemployment benefits are ending, and you have people with mortgages to pay," she says. "It's a snowball effect."
Smith says she never turns away donations unless they're going bad, but she asks people to think about the fridge as an extension of their own. "If you wouldn't eat that, what makes you think that other people would?"
Smith is working on developing longer-term partnerships with nearby restaurants, who she says have been enthusiastic about donating leftover food. To her, community fridges are an attempt at redirecting the abundance that already exists to families who need it. "There is no reason for anyone to go hungry. There is more than enough food."
Mohaommad Alawdi, 57, the Bronx, New York: 'I feel bad when people see the fridge is empty'
Mohaommed Alawdi is a familiar face around the community fridge on 242nd Street in the Bronx. "Seven days a week, you see me there," the cab driver says. Over time, he has become one of the fridge's biggest supporters; like the barbers who work nearby and look out for hot food donations, Alawdi helps keep the fridge safe for everyone.
"I feel bad, I'll be honest with you," he says. "I feel bad when I leave the area, when I come back and see some people go to the fridge and they see the fridge is empty." Alawdi says he runs to the nearby supermarket and buys fruits and vegetables when that happens. Throughout the week, the fridge showcases contributions from all the people who care for it: chicken, lamb, fish, burgers, sandwiches, home-cooked meals.
Sometimes, when Alawdi sees someone start to take too much food from the fridge, he reminds them to think of the next person who will come looking for food. "I'm not a tough guy," he says, "but I am fair."
Alawdi says he has gone so far as to give people money when the fridge is empty, and reminds them that, in the morning, the fridge will be restocked.
Scott Gerke, 35, Brooklyn, New York: 'I was afraid to open it'
Scott Gerke lives out of his van full-time, but that's a relatively new development. When the pandemic hit, the 35-year-old, who made a living as a wedding DJ for 10 years, decided to leave Key West and travel up the eastern coast of the US. "I wasn't going to wait for someone to open my world back up so I could work again," Gerke says.
Soon Gerke ended up in the Greenpoint neighborhood of Brooklyn, directly across the street from a community fridge painted electric green. He spent a week eyeing it before he walked across the street with the intention of taking something. "I was afraid to open it because I thought, 'Maybe I'm not there yet.' But I totally was."
That night, he remembers, there were different kinds of lettuce, kale, green beans, rice, and tomato sauce. For the next three weeks, Gerke fed himself from the fridge – and because he had been sharing videos of his "journey" since leaving Key West, he documented his experience on Instagram. "I just told the world, 'Hey, this is real life'," Gerke says.
Like many Americans, Gerke doesn't know how he'll survive financially without work. "I do have a little bit of anxiety every time I go to the grocery store now, which sucks," he says. The fridge gave him, at least for a time, a respite from that.
Chéz Jean, 30, the Bronx, New York: 'I want the fridges to go everywhere'
"There's no one person who is like, the head of the fridges," says Chéz Jean. "There's no hierarchy at all," they add, with a laugh.
Jean has dedicated much of their life to feeding their community. When they were 14, Jean learned about freeganism and discovered which restaurants and grocery stores regularly threw away fresh food and produce: Trader Joe's, Whole Foods. They recall noshing on cucumber rolls and sushi with new friends. And when they weren't dumpster diving for themselves, Jean rescued food to donate to homeless shelters.
So for Jean, who tends to the fridge in Kingsbridge, in the Bronx,  community fridge are rooted in the same big-picture ideas that animate their freegan lifestyle: reducing food waste, fighting climate change, rejecting the concept that nutritious food should cost money – any money.
Jean delights in bringing in vegetables that may be unfamiliar to their neighbors: Swiss chard, purple carrots. But, they say, "When it comes to food, you can't say no to food donations."
There are now at least three fridges up and running in the Bronx, and Jean says more are to come. They've been involved in the anarchist collective In Our Hearts, which has been sharing information online on how to start a community fridge. Jean estimates there's now more than 17 community fridges in New York.
"I want the fridges to go everywhere," Jean says.