Not Covid-safe: pepper spray and arrests as riot squad breaks up Sydney party
Two police officers were injured and three people arrested at Surry Hills party that broke NSW coronavirus restrictions
Two police officers have been hurt and three people arrested after a rowdy Sydney unit block party that broke New South Wales's coronavirus restrictions.
Surry Hills officers were called to a complex in the suburb after complaints about loud noise about 1am on Saturday.
While speaking with one of the occupants at the door, a policewoman was dragged inside the building. Pepper spray was used to secure her release but the man retreated inside again and locked the door.
Back-up was called in from patrols at Sydney City, Surry Hills and Kings Cross as well as the riot squad. After refusals to reopen the door, more than 100 people agreed to leave the unit and were moved on. Under NSW's coronavirus restrictions, up to 20 visitors may visit a household at any one time.
A 19-year-old woman was treated by paramedics after reportedly suffering a panic attack. She was taken to St Vincent's hospital, along with a female and a male constable who suffered minor injuries. They have all since been released.
As a result of the incident, two 19-year-old women have been charged with refusing to comply with a police direction. One is also accused of offensive behaviour and the other of hindering police.
A 24-year-old man has been charged with resisting arrest.
The trio will appear in Sydney's Downing Centre court on separate dates in January.
It is believed the party unit was a short-term rental.
Meanwhile, in the Northern Territory, three men spotted using a wheelie bin as a chariot in the Howard Springs quarantine facility have been fined.
A photo of two of the men pushing the third man in the bin was posted on social media. None of the men were wearing face masks, which is a requirement at the camp, police said on Friday.
The men were each fined $5,056 for breaching quarantine rules.