Unions push for better protections as 80% of employees say they want to keep working from home
Exclusive: survey finds 40% are working longer hours and 90% are not being paid overtime or penalty rates for the extra time
More than 80% of workers want to continue working from home in some capacity, but unions believe more protections will be required to facilitate it without discrimination or loss of pay and conditions.
Those are the results of a survey of 10,000 Australian employees conducted by unions, which found that 40% are working longer hours and 90% are not being paid overtime or penalty rates for extra hours worked.
The Australian Council of Trade Unions released the survey on Wednesday ahead of an executive meeting to adopt a charter of rights around working from home.
Working from home will be one of the union movement's major demands as the government attempts to kickstart the economy out of the Covid-19 recession, along with its reconstruction plan proposing renewable energy investments and free childcare.
The industrial relations minister, Christian Porter, recently encouraged companies to bring their staff back to the office "as quickly as possible" where safe to do so as part of efforts to restore the normal functioning of the economy.
But according to the ACTU survey, workers are not yet ready to give up Zoom meetings in pyjama bottoms – the reality for many stuck at home during coronavirus lockdowns.
The number of workers who spent most of their days at home leapt from 12% before the pandemic to 31% in September, with about the same number reporting they worked once a week (9%) or once a month (6%) at home.
According to the survey 81% of workers said they would like to work from home if they were provided with enough support and 47% said they were more productive at home.
But working from home has imposed an average $530 in additional expenses on each worker and about a third (32%) reported an increased workload.
Despite saving time on the morning and evening commute, most workers (62%) reported starting work before 8am and one in three worked up to or past 9pm.
The majority (60%) of home workers reported they were now spending more time as a carer, an issue exacerbated by school closures.
Half (49%) of home workers reported experiencing a mental health issue including debilitating workplace health issues like stress, anxiety, depression and self-harm.
In a report released alongside the survey, the ACTU argues that a working from home charter should make clear that "the rights and benefits of those now working at home not be less favourable than what they were prior to the move to home-based work, and that working from home not be grounds for discrimination".
The charter of rights proposes that employers will have to commit that all workers' time and expenses should be compensated, and workers should have the "right to disconnect" to preserve work-life balance.
The other demands are for a safe workplace, connection to other workers through unions, and rights at work including maintenance of all conditions and the prospect of sharing productivity gains.
The ACTU secretary, Sally McManus, said the union movement – which represents 1.6 million workers across all industries – "will be working to support our members … to ensure we lock in fair working from home arrangements".
"Working from home should be voluntary and people need control over the hours they work," she said.
"We all need to be aware of the problems if there is not sufficient choice and control, and this survey shows the potential impacts on mental health."
"We also need to be aware that working from home has particular impacts on women and carers, and we don't want to see existing gender inequality entrenched through new forms of work."
Many employer groups are yet to develop a policy position on whether and how working from home should continue.
In October the Business Council of Australia chief executive, Jennifer Westacott, told the Ron McCallum industrial relations debate there was a "mixed view" about working from home and the length of Covid lockdowns had revealed "structural problems" with the practice.
"[We've] got to make sure we're very careful about [making] huge assumptions that everyone now will work from home and it's good for everyone," she said.
Westacott said working from home should be safe and "a choice" – requiring changes to the workplace system and discrimination laws.
Westacott also called for a "gender lens" to ensure women weren't working from home because the childcare system hadn't been fixed – "denying them opportunities for promotion and advancement".