High court judges query Clive Palmer claim WA border ban not about stopping Covid spread
The Queensland businessman's lawyers have abandoned argument Western Australia ban is directed at preventing interstate movement
High court justices have cast doubt on Clive Palmer's claim the Western Australian border ban is directed at preventing interstate movement instead of the spread of Covid-19.
At a hearing in Canberra on Tuesday, Palmer's lawyers eventually abandoned the argument, focusing instead on whether the border ban is "reasonably necessary". They were also forced to reframe Palmer's case to challenge whether WA emergency laws authorise the ban.
Palmer's case has returned from the federal court, which found the border ban was "effective to a substantial extent" at preventing coronavirus re-entering Western Australia.
Palmer's counsel, Peter Dunning, accepted that finding but argued the court should treat low-risk jurisdictions differently because the ban was no longer necessary for travellers from most states and territories.
Dunning argued that there was "no rational basis" to exclude travellers from states such as Tasmania and so WA's directions were "properly characterised" as a law to prevent interstate travel, in breach of section 92 of the constitution.
Although Dunning accepted that there may be some additional risk from more travellers from low-risk jurisdictions, he argued it was an "acceptable" risk even if one agreed with the precautionary principle set out by the federal court.
Justice James Edelman observed that although the WA rules "might be a little more blunt than [they] need to be to achieve the purpose of preventing Covid-19", this did not mean the rules were directed at the ulterior motive of stopping interstate movement.
"There is a difference between purpose and effect," he said. "The purpose is to prevent the spread of the pandemic … there is no suggestion that the purpose is to prevent travel into Western Australia although that [is] one of its effects."
Justice Patrick Keane noted that – unlike the precedent case of Gratwick – WA's rules were directed at all travellers arriving in Western Australia, not just those from interstate. Keane said this "may impact on the character of the prohibition", suggesting the court was less likely to find it was discriminatory.
"One can see the concern of the legislation and the character of directions made under it is with the emergency, the prospect of the pandemic."
Over the course of Tuesday's hearing, Dunning shifted tack on the purpose of the WA health directions.
In the morning, Dunning said justice Darryl Rangiah had been careful to leave the high court room to find the ban was not "reasonably necessary" for low-risk jurisdictions, despite finding it was effective at preventing re-entry of Covid-19 generally.
Several justices raised procedural concerns with the way Palmer had pleaded his case.
The chief justice, Susan Kiefel noted that Palmer had challenged the validity of health directions, not the laws enabling them, but section 92 applies to the validity of the laws themselves not directions.
Edelman expressed a similar concern, that the mooted constitutional restriction must also apply to the law authorising directions.
At first, Dunning conceded the directions were validly made but claimed that they had the "character of legislation" so can be challenged with section 92.
After lunch, Kiefel suggested the case could be reframed to argue that if the directions are not "reasonably necessary" to control or abate the coronavirus risk then there must also be "a question about whether they are authorised by the statute".
"You could frame it that way, yes," Dunning conceded.
Defending the necessity of the border ban, the WA solicitor general Joshua Thomson highlighted justice Rangiah's findings that no set of restrictions would be "equally as effective" at preventing the reintroduction of coronavirus.
"There is no finding of fact [by the federal court] that there is zero risk of reintroduction of the virus from low-risk jurisdictions," he said.
Thomson highlighted the "real not fanciful" risk that Covid-19 positive travellers would "border hop" through low-risk jurisdictions into Western Australia, warning that not all people could be expected to act honestly.
He noted justice Rangiah found it "may be possible" to ease restrictions on lower risk jurisdictions, but Thomson added the judge had not concluded the state "should or must" do so.
He said that is "precisely" what Western Australia will do from 14 November, when it will reopen to all states and territories except Victoria and New South Wales. People coming from those states will still be required to self-quarantine.
Although the federal court made findings in August, the high court will judge the case on the basis of the law and coronavirus risk at the time of the hearing.
Thomson argued that changes in September applied tougher exemptions to Victoria and NSW – proving the measures were calibrated to risk rather than indiscriminately targeting all states.
The hearing continues on Wednesday, with submissions from the other states and territories intervening.
The federal government pulled out of the case in August under sustained pressure from WA premier, Mark McGowan. Scott Morrison has pleaded with Palmer to drop the case.