Covid-19 deaths must prompt better healthcare for people with learning disabilities
The government, NHS and health and social care providers must act to tackle health inequalities
People with learning disabilities are much more likely to die from coronavirus. And black and Asian people with learning disabilities are even more likely to die from coronavirus.
This isn't because the virus targets people with learning disabilities. It is because society fails to do enough to support the health and wellbeing of those at the sharp end of structural and health inequalities.
A Public Health England report published last week found that people with learning disabilities were six times more likely to die from coronavirus than the general population (standardising for age and sex). This is beyond awful, but no surprise.
Even before the pandemic, on average people with learning disabilities died much younger than those without learning disabilities. Research published in 2019 by the Learning Disabilities Mortality Review (Leder) programme found that average life expectancy was 27 years shorter for women and girls and 23 years shorter for men and boys. Far too often, people with learning disabilities die from conditions that rarely kill others and which are easily preventable or treatable, for example severe constipation.
The question is what must be done.
A report on the deaths of 206 people with learning disabilities in the early months of the pandemic from the Leder programme, also published last week, includes 76 recommendations specific to coronavirus and further general recommendations. In response to the Leder report, NHS England and NHS Improvement published a summary of the actions they have taken or intend to take. They also issued some helpful actions for GPs and health and care organisations.
As there is no single magic bullet, the government, NHS England and health and social care providers must take an approach that combines a range of actions. But there are several things that must always happen – not just in policy but in practice – and these must be carried out with absolute determination at every level. There is a need for immediate action in relation to the pandemic and a sustained focus to address pre-existing issues that have been exacerbated by coronavirus. The following should be a priority:
People with learning disabilities should be given a higher priority for coronavirus vaccinations when they become available.
There should be regular asymptomatic testing for all people with learning disabilities and support staff – not just those in residential care settings. This should also be extended to family carers. There is limited data in the reports about mortality rates in non-residential community-based support, but enough information to justify this, particularly as the government expands testing capabilities to students and city-wide pilots.
There must be more intensive support for GPs to identify patients who have a learning disability, so they can provide additional support.
People with Down's syndrome were this month added to the list of people who are clinically "​extremely vulnerable", after evidence showed their increased level of risk. Following this, some GPs got in touch with people quickly to offer support. This is a welcome example of the importance of using evidence, making decisions, identifying people, and taking action.
NHS England must provide even stronger support to GPs to rapidly increase annual health checks for people with learning disabilities. Annual health checks were established to help address health inequalities and are successful. They are reinforced by specific guidance in relation to coronavirus. However, half of eligible people with learning disabilities do not get them and this proportion has not changed for several years.
Every person with a learning disability should be offered a flu vaccination, unless clinically inappropriate. Lots of effort is being made in this area – it must continue.
Providers of services for people with learning disabilities must ensure support staff have a good general understanding about common health issues, including those that disproportionately affect people with learning disabilities, such as constipation, obesity and breathing problems.
As waiting lists for NHS treatments peak at their highest level for more than a decade, people with learning disabilities, who may find it harder to say if their condition is deteriorating, must receive additional health checks and reviews.
Professional and regulatory sanctions should be used when healthcare providers continue to make unlawful blanket decisions that limit or restrict access to appropriate treatment for people with learning disabilities.
Underpinning all these actions must be an absolute commitment, on the part of public bodies and those who work for them, to address the health inequalities affecting people with learning disabilities. This needs to combine a sharp focus on barriers to prevention, diagnosis and quality treatment with addressing the wider causes of poor health, including inadequate support, poor housing and poverty.
Jonathan Senker is chief executive of advocacy and involvement charity VoiceAbility. This is an edited version of a post published on the VoiceAbility website