Covid: England's tiers 'need strengthening to get through winter'
Public health official Dr Susan Hopkins says tier 1 had 'little effect' and tier 2 varied across country
England's three-tier system of Covid-19 restrictions will have to be strengthened to get the country through the winter months, a senior health official has said, hinting at a possible new tier 4 of tighter restrictions in December, when the lockdown is due to be lifted.
The tier system, introduced last month, put areas into different categories labelled medium, high or very high risk, or tiers 1, 2 and 3 respectively.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
The health secretary, Matt Hancock, said the government hoped the national lockdown would be replaced on 2 December with a tiered system "similar to what we had before".
But Dr Susan Hopkins, an epidemiologist, told the Downing Street press conference on Monday that tier 1 coronavirus restrictions had "little effect", while the impact of tier 2 varied in different places.
Hopkins, a Public Health England director advising the government's coronavirus response, said: "We have recognised that the tiering of the country has had a different effect in each area.
"Tier 3, and especially tier 3 plus in the north, has had an effect in reducing the numbers of cases in the north-west and we can see the north-west's declining number of cases now.
"Tier 2 seems to hold in some areas and not so well in others, and so really it depends on how fast transmission is occurring and how well the individuals in the population are taking that advice in.
"We see very little effect from tier 1 and I think when we look at what tiers may be there in the future, we will have to think about strengthening them in order to get us through the winter months until the vaccine is available for everyone."
Hancock has said it is too early to know the impact of the second lockdown in England, but he hopes measures can be eased on 2 December.
He told the press conference: "It is too early for us to know what the number of cases will be as we come to the end of the current lockdown.
"At the moment, most of the tests we're getting back, and most of the positive cases, are from around the time the lockdown came in, so we are yet to see in the data – and it's too early to expect to see in the data – the impact of the second lockdown.
"But we absolutely hope to be able to replace the national lockdown with a tiered system similar to what we had before."
Listed by local authority for Great Britain. The devolved health authority publishes regional statistics for Northern Ireland.
At a briefing on Monday, the prime minister's official spokesman told reporters: "We are committed to setting out next week what the replacement regime will be and that will be a return to the localised approach, and we're actively working on those plans at the moment."
The government said a further 213 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19 as of Monday, bringing the UK total to 52,147. There had been a further 21,363 lab-confirmed cases of coronavirus in the UK as of 9am on Monday.