Covid tiers revolt may leave ministers reliant on Labour in key vote
George Eustice says up to 100 Tory MPs have concerns over post-lockdown tier system
Up to 100 Conservative MPs are concerned at England's new coronavirus tiers, meaning the government may have to rely on Labour votes to get the system approved by parliament, the UK environment secretary, George Eustice, has said.
Labour has not yet guaranteed its support for the system amid concerns in the party about the level of financial support available for the hard-hit hospitality industry.
A Treasury source confirmed that the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, was planning a new package of support for pubs, bars and restaurant hit by the impact of restrictions on pre-Christmas trade but said details were still being "worked up".
Amid increasing Tory backbench disquiet about the post-lockdown tiers, in which virtually all regions in England would be put into the higher two levels this week, Eustice also said ministers could not rule out a third national lockdown.
"I think it's too early to say," he told Sky News. "We can't rule anything out, because this is a rapidly developing situation. The government has to respond to the epidemiological evidence that it will have at a given time.
Here are some of the key dates ahead for the UK's Covid-19 restrictions.
The current lockdown in England ends, and the new strengthened tier system comes into force with nearly 99% of England headed for the strictest two tiers. Only the Isle of Wight, Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly are set to go into tier 1, with more than 32 million people in tier 2 and more than 23 million in the toughest tier 3.
New restriction come into force in Wales. Pubs, restaurants and cafes will be banned from serving alcohol, and will be unable to open to customers beyond 6pm. Businesses can offer a takeaway service after 6pm, and if they have an off-licence can sell takeaway alcohol up until 10pm. Bingo halls, bowling alleys, soft play centres, casinos, skating rinks and amusement arcades will also have to close.
The rule allowingfour people from four different householdsto meet indoors in pubs and restaurants will stay in place. The decision will be reviewed on 17 December.
Ministers will consider data about England's coronavirus cases weekly throughout the tiers period, while legislation requires a formal review of tiering allocations every fortnight. The first review point is 16 December, with new tier allocations announced the following day – decided by a cabinet committee chaired by the prime minister. They will come into effect on Saturday 19 December, Boris Johnson said.
For five days over Christmas there will be a UK-wide relaxation of rules to let up to three households form a 'bubble' so they can mix socially indoors and stay overnight to enjoy the festive period together. In Scotland, a maximum of eight people will be allowed but that does not include under-12s. In Northern Ireland, the window has been extended to 22-28 December to allow for additional travel time between countries.
Johnson has announced a "sunset" clause on the tiered restrictions in England, meaning they will expire on 3 February and require MPs' approval if they are to be extended into March.
"It's always difficult to predict exactly what will happen. But we judge at moment that if we stick to the course with this tiered approach, at this stage, then this might get us through the winter."
Boris Johnson is trying to win over concerned Tories with promises of an economic analysis of the new tiers before Tuesday's Commons vote, and an appeal to MPs to show unity, saying "the worst is nearly behind us".
Asked if the scale of Conservative dissent meant the government was expecting to have to rely on Labour votes to get the plan through the Commons, Eustice said: "I don't know, and the chief whip will be, obviously, talking to those MPs who have got concerns.
He said: "I've seen suggestions that there could up to 100 or so people who have got concerns. But the prime minister and other ministers will be working very hard to reassure them about the steps that we're taking."
Pressed again on the need for Labour votes, Eustice conceded this was possible. He said: "Like all these things, it will depend on what other parties do, yes. It will depend on what the Labour party choose to do. I think at time like this, when you do have a national emergency, and we're having to take emergency measures to try and save lives, it's not the time really for any political party to play political games."
While the tiers were unveiled as a system that would last until the spring, Eustice said MPs would be offered a vote to renew them in late January. Some MPs are demanding this take place earlier.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
Eustice said he understood MPs' concerns: "There's great frustration with the emergency measures that we've had to take to deal with this pandemic. We haven't taken them lightly, we have had to take these to get the virus under control.
"What we need to show to those MPs, and the country at large, is that we've got a clear route towards fixing this problem and turning a corner, and that will come through the deployment of the vaccine."
In a letter on Sunday to the new Covid Research Group of Conservative MPs, which comprises many of those worried about the new tiers, Johnson promised the analysis would be published on Monday.
"Disagreement on approach is natural, and I hope you recognise that the government is seeking as far as possible to listen to criticism and respond positively to constructive proposals," the prime minister wrote.
"There is every reason to hope and believe that the worst is nearly behind us, so now more than ever is the time to demonstrate unity and resolve. As we move from winter to spring, the prospects offered by vaccines and testing mean we can begin the process of recovery in earnest and focus our energies once again on improving the lives of the people we were elected to serve."