Santa's grottos and carolling allowed under England's Christmas Covid rules
Volunteering and church services also permitted but advice varies for different tiers
Christmas carolling, attending church services, volunteering and taking a trip to Santa's grotto will all be permitted in the run-up to Christmas, according to guidance for England published by the government.
However, the new rules vary across the different tiers that regions will enter when lockdown ends on 2 December. For example, the advice says school nativities will be able to take place, with those in tiers 1 and 2 able to attend in person, while those in tier 3 in England will have to watch streams or recordings.
There is detailed advice on carolling, with special rules because singing increases the risk of transmitting the virus through the air. The rules for indoor performances say professional and amateur choirs may perform in "any indoor venue permitted to open" but add that any audience or congregation must not take part in any "singing, shouting and chanting".
"If singing does take place, steps should be taken to reduce the risk of transmission, including limiting the number of people participating as far as possible," the advice states.
Outdoor carolling will be permitted in any outdoor venue that is allowed to open and audiences may join in with singing. Professional singers or those taking part in a supervised activity for under-18s will "not be limited in number and do not have to adhere to gathering limits", but all performances must adhere to performing arts guidance.
That advice, created by Public Health England, says singing must take place in well-ventilated areas and choir members must keep their distance from each other. Audiences must also wear masks and capacity must be managed at events.
Door-to-door carol singing is allowed but only in groups of up to six.
Last week, the government said up to three households would be allowed to mix for a five-day period between 23-27 December in "Christmas bubbles".
All tiers can attend places of worship for services from 2 December, but the rules on who people can attend with changes depending on the tier in which they live. For example, there is no indoor mixing allowed outside of tier 1, but people in the same Christmas bubble can attend together. The advice says the Christmas bubble rules will no longer apply during New Year's Eve.
Nativity plays will need to be performed within existing school bubbles, while audiences in tier 1 and 2 areas will face certain restrictions, such as social distancing.
Santa's grottos can open as long as appropriate Covid-secure measures such as social distancing are in place and they are in venues that are permitted to open according to the region's tier level.
Christmas volunteering is also allowed, but those taking part are encouraged to do so from home.
The rules for weddings, civil partnerships and funerals will not change between 23 and 27 December and will depend on the different tiers.