Nottinghamshire to ban some alcohol sales after 9pm under tier 3 Covid rules
Off-licence sales prohibition is first in England as beauty salons will also have to close in toughest rules yet
Nottinghamshire will be placed under tier 3 coronavirus measures from Friday, it was confirmed on Wednesday night, with a series of extra rules including England's first virus-related ban on off-licence alcohol sales after 9pm.
West Yorkshire is set to follow suit within days – meaning more than 11 million people in England will soon be under the toughest level of restrictions.
Ministers have told leaders in both regions they want to impose the strictest lockdown rules due to growing concern over hospital admissions and rising cases in the over-60s.
In Nottinghamshire, on top of the off-licence restriction, pubs, bars, beauty salons, tanning shops, nail bars and tattoo parlours will have to close from Friday. Hairdressers and gyms will stay open.
The alcohol restriction was proposed by local police, keen to stop street disorder and Covid spreading at house parties, according to one person involved in negotiations.
The government said alcohol can continue to be purchased in hospitality venues when accompanying a substantial meal, up until 10pm.
Jason Zadrozny, the leader of Ashfield district council, said the closure of "personal care" establishments – excluding hairdressers and barber shops – had been on the insistence of Public Health England and meant the county was "effectively in tier 3 plus".
No other tier 3 areas –which include Greater Manchester and the Liverpool and Sheffield city regions –include off-licence restrictions, suggesting the tiering system is not a one-size-fits-all model.
In Nottinghamshire, infection rates are among the highest in the country and continue to rise rapidly. The weekly case rate stands at 364 people per 100,000 in Nottinghamshire county, and is 239 per 100,000 in those over 60, rising to 772 per 100,000 in those aged 17 to 21 years old.
In Nottingham city the current weekly case rate per 100,000 rises to 493 per 100,000, with 918 per 100,000 aged between 17 to 21. As of 20 October, there were 194 confirmed Covid-19 cases at Nottingham University Hospitals Trust, with 11 mechanical ventilation beds occupied by confirmed Covid-19 patients.
Though a deal has not yet been struck with government, West Yorkshire is expected to follow Nottinghamshire into tier 3 within days. That means 11.1 million people – one in five of England's population – will be subject to the strictest lockdown curbs in Lancashire, Greater Manchester, Nottinghamshire, Warrington and the Liverpool and Sheffield city regions.
In a statement on Wednesday night, West Yorkshire's leaders said discussions were ongoing to "discuss steps for controlling the rising Covid-19 infection rates across the region and a package of measures to support the West Yorkshire economy should it be necessary to move into tier 3 (very high) restrictions".
But they insisted a deal had not yet been agreed and that talks would continue on Thursday.
Susan Hinchcliffe, the leader of Bradford Council, said discussions about West Yorkshire were ongoing but it appeared the government was "unflinching in their resolve" to place the region into tier 3.
She said it was unclear what support would be offered to businesses in the event of a move to the higher tier but the government had told council leaders it would be a "template package" with no room for negotiation – although ministers had promised to clarify the support package in a further meeting.
Another senior regional figure said "it's a question of when rather than if" tier 3 was imposed on West Yorkshire. It is understood that leaders are considering a "vanilla tier 3", meaning pubs and bars not serving meals would close but everything else would stay open.
Zulfi Karim, the president of Council for Mosques, Bradford, who also sits on the Bradford outbreak control board, said discussions were ongoing and that there was a gold command meeting in Bradford at 4pm on Wednesday.
"As people of Bradford we think it should happen. I think we should go for lockdown quickly. I've been calling for that for a week now," he said, complaining that "political shenanigans" seemed to be slowing the process. Bradford Royal Infirmary was "under a lot of pressure," he added.
Listed by local authority for Great Britain. The devolved health authority publishes regional statistics for Northern Ireland.
Nottinghamshire is expected to receive £8 a head for test and trace and a further £20 a head for business support, the same as in other tier 3 areas, which equates to about £32m in total for the region.
Conservative MPs including Ben Bradley and Brendan Clarke-Smith, who represent seats in north Nottinghamshire, had been calling for their areas to be kept out of any tier 3 restrictions, but on Tuesday they conceded it was inevitable.
In a Facebook video, Bradley said the rising infection rate in the north of the country "makes it increasingly difficult for us as MPs to argue that it's different, that we're not in the same boat" as Nottingham, where university students have accounted for a high proportion of cases in the past month.
In Bassetlaw, north Nottinghamshire, the infection rate almost doubled, to 311.6 cases per 100,000 people, in the week to 24 October compared with the previous seven days.
Barry Sheerman, the Labour MP for Huddersfield, said the health minister Helen Whately had hinted that West Yorkshire may be able to avoid the highest level of restrictions if local authorities were given enhanced support for test and trace and enforcement, an idea proposed by local leaders.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
Sheerman said: "I think within a week or two it will be clear that we've got a national emergency and it needs a national policy. What worries me about this whole process is that the data shows that the whack-a-mole strategy focusing on particular regions and local authorities is obviously not working.
"The message loud and clear from Helen Whately was that perhaps there was an opportunity to stay in the second tier but with a bit of special help."