Nottingham and Warrington to enter tier-3 Covid restrictions
Measures mean 8.2 million people in England will be living in highest level of lockdown
Nottingham and Warrington will become the latest areas of England to come under the tightest Covid restrictions, with pubs closed and all household mixing banned.
Tier 3 restrictions will come into force at 12.01am on Tuesday for Warrington and 12.01am on Thursday for Nottingham.
By the end of the week, 8.2 million people will be living under tier 3 restrictions, or one in seven people in England. The new measures mean all pubs and bars must close, unless they are serving "substantial meals". Alcohol can be served only alongside food.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
Additional closures will include betting shops, adult gaming centres, casinos and soft play centres and areas.
Infection rates in Warrington are among the highest in the country and continue to rise rapidly, with case rates at 361 people per 100,000 among all age groups – double the England average of 180.6 people per 100,000.
Although infection rates were originally higher in the younger population, rates have now increased to 217 per 100,000 in over-60s, a 20% rise on the previous week, the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said.
As of 20 October, there are 117 confirmed Covid-19 cases in hospital in Warrington, with 17 mechanical ventilation beds occupied by confirmed Covid-19 patients, according to the DHSC.
Warrington is sandwiched between Liverpool and Manchester, both of which are already in tier 3, along with nearby Lancashire and the Sheffield city region in South Yorkshire.
As well as the city of Nottingham, residents of the commuter suburbs of Rushcliffe, Gedling and Broxtowe will be subject to the tighter restrictions. The rest of Nottinghamshire will remain in tier 2.
Warrington will receive a financial support package of £1.68m as well as £4.2m in business support funding. "This will support local contract tracing, the enforcement of restrictions, and the provision of further local level data," the DHSC said.
The level of funding is roughly comparable to the amounts received by other areas in tier 3, adding up to approximately £28 per head.
Nottingham city council said a package of support "similar to those secured in other parts of the country" would be formally announced on Tuesday.
Earlier in October, the Nottingham council leader, Cllr David Mellen, urged the government to introduce tighter restrictions to his city quickly as infections soared. The infection rate in Nottingham fell from 726.6 in the seven days to 15 October to 464.4 in the week to 22 October, with 1,546 new cases.
On Thursday last week Nottingham University Hospitals NHS trust announced it was postponing some non-urgent surgery and appointments until 6 November "following a dramatic increase in the number of patients with Covid-19 in our hospital".
Tracy Taylor, the trust chief executive, said: "Over the last few days we have exceeded 200 patients with the virus in the hospital, and every day this is increasing by nearly another full ward of people."
West Yorkshire could be the next area to enter tier 3. The leaders of the region's councils had a meeting on Monday with senior government ministers and the deputy chief medical officer to discuss the next steps.
In a statement afterwards, they said: "The latest data on infections and hospital admissions shows a continued rise, and we have repeated our calls to government that further local action needs to be taken, including strengthening community engagement and test and trace. There will be further discussions with government in the coming days."
Lilian Greenwood, the Labour MP for Nottingham South, said the government's communications with local politicians and the public over its tier 3 announcement had been "woeful".
"It's more than a week since the prime minister and Matt Hancock said they were talking to Notts about going into tier 3, yet talks didn't even begin until late on Thursday and MPs weren't even briefed until Friday morning," said Greenwood.
"People rightly want to understand why extra restrictions are needed, what the restrictions involve – what are they being asked to do, how will wages and businesses be supported, and what do we need to achieve to come out of tier 3?"
Warrington and Nottingham residents must not socialise with anybody they do not live with, or have not formed a support bubble with, in any indoor setting, in any private garden, or at most outdoor hospitality venues and ticketed events. They can meet in a group of no more than six in an outdoor public space such as a park or beach, the countryside, a public garden or a sports venue.
People should try to avoid travelling outside the very high alert level area or entering another, other than for work, education, for caring responsibilities or to travel through as part of a longer journey.
The restrictions will be reviewed after 28 days.