Sheffield mayor says £41m from government 'not end of discussion'
Dan Jarvis says he will not hesitate to ask for more support as region enters tier 3 coronavirus restrictions
The Sheffield city region mayor has said he will not hesitate to seek additional government support for South Yorkshire after the region entered the strictest tier 3 coronavirus controls.
Dan Jarvis, who is also the MP for Barnsley Central, said he had spoken to Boris Johnson this week and told him the £41m funding package did not represent "the end of the discussion" and that he would review the situation in the coming weeks.
"If I think there's a requirement to go back to government with a further list of support then I will," he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
"The scale of the challenge is very significant. We are acutely aware of the pressures our NHS is under, not least because winter hasn't bitten yet, so we are looking very carefully at what we need to do.
"But if there is a requirement for more resource, whether it is economic support or it is other measures of assistance from the government, I won't hesitate to go back and ask for them."
There were reports that Jarvis had asked for £90m, but he said he did not recognise the figure. "We engaged in a tough process of negotiation with the government; of course I wanted more money than I secured. But we secured more money than originally the government were offering."
He said an agreement to keep it under review was secured with the government, which is committed to levelling up the country. "There is a real risk that the levelling up agenda will be derailed. The north has been hit disproportionately hard by this pandemic because of existing fragilities in our economy and society."
In response to claims from the Sheffield council leader, Julie Dore, that the behind-closed-doors negotiations had been a charade because of alleged Tory bias towards the south, Jarvis said: "I did it my way … I have to weigh a number of factors, not least the fact there is a comprehensive spending review around the corner."
In an open letter to residents on Friday, he acknowledged that the "weariness" with which many will have received the news of entering the strictest tier of coronavirus restrictions.
"Some of you will be wondering if these measures are worth it," he wrote. "Those feelings are understandable. But we should be under no illusions. These measures are needed. The scientific advice is that they can help. We still have a difficult path ahead, but there is a light at the end of the tunnel. These restrictions will help us reach it sooner, and at a lower cost."
It comes as the north's three most senior bishops said Johnson's approach to Covid-19 risked dividing the nation and causing a generation of "disillusion and unrest" among younger people.
They said the social consequences of a lack of collaboration between Westminster and regional leaders, coupled with lockdown without adequate economic support, could be more dangerous and destabilising than the virus itself.
"A divided nation where one section of society, generally wealthy, generally living in the south, is able to screen itself more effectively from coronavirus and get through to the other side of this pandemic, and another section of society, generally poorer, generally in the north, suffers greatly," said the archbishop of York, Stephen Cottrell, the bishop of Leeds, Nick Baines, and the bishop of Manchester David Walker.