Sturgeon unveils five-level Covid lockdown rules for Scotland
First minister says highest level is similar to lockdown imposed across UK in March
Nicola Sturgeon has unveiled a five-level system for restricting people's movements and limiting physical contact as part of new measures to combat the spread of Covid-19.
The system includes a top level that is tougher than the highest of England's three tiers, which Sturgeon said would be closer to the lockdown imposed across the UK in late March.
It would involve the closure of all non-essential shops, bars, restaurants and leisure venues; strict controls on travelling and using public transport; and potentially a "stay at home" message similar to that coming into force in Wales on Friday evening.
The first minister said schools would remain open if possible and people would still be able to meet outdoors, adding that ministers would try to avoid the heavy restrictions imposed in Wales if possible.
"We are not back at square one," she said. "We have made progress in tackling the virus and we have more tools at our disposal now to control it."
The first minister said the "strategic framework", which will come into force on Monday 2 November, after discussions with opposition parties and councils and a vote in Holyrood on Tuesday, would be applied at local council level, with a weekly review of all the restrictions in place.
She said the framework would "allow us to take a national approach if required. It's possible that the whole country at some point could be placed at the same level but it also means we don't have to take a one size fits all approach if that's not warranted."
Scotland's coronavirus infection and fatality rates have risen to levels last seen in May. Sturgeon said data showed 18 people had died in Scotland in the past 24 hours, with 975 people in hospital, up by 41, and 76 people in intensive care, up by two. There had been 1,401 cases reported over the last day, bringing the total to 54,016.
Over the last week, there had been 94 deaths confirmed of people with Covid-19, and the number of people in intensive care had doubled, although the rate of increase appears to be slowing, she said.
Rural councils and the Scottish islands, which have had far lower infection and fatality rates than populated parts of the mainland, have urged Scottish ministers to allow as much local flexibility as possible, fearing their tourism and hospitality businesses will be severely hit.
Sturgeon said the lowest level, level zero, would be near normal, and would continue until a Covid-19 vaccine or treatment was available. "We're hopeful for both developments in the months ahead," she added. People would be allowed to meet indoors in groups of up to eight people and most businesses could reopen.
With modest controls in level 1, she said level 2 would be close to the ban on indoor gatherings and restrictions on pub opening hours in force across much of Scotland, while level 3 would be similar to the controls in force in central Scotland until 2 November, where travel is restricted to essential journeys, indoor household meetings are banned and all licensed premises are closed.
Level 3 also includes closing stadia and leisure venues, a ban on all alcohol sales and amateur contact sports, and greater restrictions on physical contact at colleges and universities.
Sturgeon announced further financial support for businesses hit by future restrictions, similar to the package offered by the Treasury for firms in England, but the hospitality industry and business leaders said the sums involved were too low.
The Scottish Hospitality Group, which represents large hotel, pub and nightclub owners whose premises have been shut in central Scotland, said the five-tier system operating in different ways in different parts of the country "are just another example of an unnecessarily complex system that leaves both businesses and the public confused".
Tracy Black, the director of CBI Scotland, said: "No more pubs, cafes or shops should be forced to close at short notice or manufacturers asked to down tools with essential orders unfulfilled. At all levels, support must be made available from the moment any restrictions come into force."
Dr Nicola Steedman, Scotland's deputy chief medical officer, defended the new framework. She said: "The number of levels is because we want to plan for everything, which clinically is the right thing to do."