One in 10 UK workers asked to work by bosses during furlough
Criminal gangs have syphoned off nearly £2bn in taxpayer funds, say auditors
Nearly one in 10 workers whose wages were covered by the UK government have said their bosses asked them to work during furlough, which was against the rules of the scheme.
Criminal gangs have syphoned off nearly £2bn in taxpayer funds allocated to help businesses and furloughed workers, according to a report.
The revelations come in a review of the furlough scheme by the National Audit Office, which praised civil servants for pushing through employment support schemes at high speed, but said that in their haste they might have left some doors open for fraudsters.
The auditors said HM Revenue and Customs should have made sure employees knew their employer was taking furlough cash, so they could challenge potential fraud.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
About 9.6 million people were put on furlough through the coronavirus jobs retention scheme, while a further 2.6 million were helped through the self-employment income support scheme.
The NAO said there was evidence the "schemes provided an effective bridge during the early phases of the pandemic, allowing some people to return to work when the national lockdown eased".
By the end of July, about 5 million people were furloughed, while unemployment was broadly stable at 4%.
However, the number of people on payrolls dropped by half a million between March and April, and the NAO also found that one in five people who were not furloughed still had their wages or hours cut.
The NAO said the furlough scheme was rushed through at breakneck speed at the start of the pandemic. HMRC's IT team usually needs 18 months to deliver major projects, but the furlough scheme was up and running in four weeks.
But, as a result, HMRC and the Treasury had to accept a "greater risk than normal" of fraud and error. The tax office's original working estimate was a fraud and error rate of between 5% and 10% for the furlough scheme, meaning nearly £4bn so far in cash terms.
The NAO report says between 2.5% and 5 per cent of the total money issued to all businesses was "almost certainly" siphoned off by criminal fraudsters, amounting to between £1bn and £1.95bn.
The auditors said "limiting applications to existing taxpayers should have reduced the fraud risk, but HMRC could have done more to make clear to employees whether their employer was part of the furlough scheme".
HMRC now faces the challenge of how to chase possible fraudulent claims, or payments made in error. The department believes it would take 500 staff members to track down £275m from 10,000 of the most high-risk furlough grants.
This is a high rate of return, but the department would have to take those workers away from its tax compliance team – which has an even higher return rate.
It takes 18 months to recruit and train new staff to perform the jobs, HMRC says, so that option is off the table. This month, the department decided to take on private contractors to do some of the work.
Initially, HMRC considered publishing the names of all employers that had claimed furlough but it later decided against this, saying it could have deterred too many legitimate claimants.
Getting in touch with staff individually to say their employer was claiming furlough cash to cover their salary, which might have alerted employees that their workplace was making fraudulent claims, was ruled out as too time-consuming.
HMRC will publish the names of employers who claim under the new jobs support scheme, and will notify employees that their workplace has claimed support money to cover their salary.
A government spokesperson said: "The government's priority from the start of the outbreak has been on protecting jobs and getting support to those who need it as quickly as possible, and our employment support schemes have provided a lifeline to millions of hardworking families across the UK. We make no apology for the speed at which they were delivered.
"Our schemes were designed to minimise fraud from the outset and we have rejected or blocked thousands of fraudulent claims. We will not tolerate those who seek to defraud taxpayers and will take action against perpetrators, including criminal prosecution."