Stoke, Slough and Coventry moved into tier 2 Covid measures
Hundreds of thousands more people face tougher restrictions from this weekend
Hundreds of thousands of people in Stoke-on-Trent, Coventry and Slough are facing tougher Covid-19 restrictions including a ban on households mixing socially indoors.
The health secretary, Matt Hancock, announced that from Saturday the three areas would move into tier 2 of England's three-tier system.
He said rates of infection were surging in the areas, with a "concerning" increase in coronavirus cases among people aged over 60, prompting the government to act.
Unveiling the new measures in the House of Commons on Thursday, Hancock said: "Unfortunately we're seeing rising rates of infection in Stoke-on-Trent, in Coventry and in Slough. In all of these areas there are over 100 positive cases per 100,000 people, cases are doubling around every fortnight, and we're seeing a concerning increase of cases among the over-60s.
"So we've agreed, in partnership with local leaders, to move these areas into the high local alert level, coming into force at one minute past midnight on Saturday. The central change is that people cannot now meet other households socially indoors. This applies in any setting, at home or in a restaurant or any other venue.
"The rule of six still applies to any outdoor setting and although you may continue to travel to open venues, you should reduce the number of journeys where possible."
Thanking local leaders for their work and cooperation, Hancock sought to reassure people living in the three areas that they would be supported by the government, including with new economic measures announced by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, earlier on Thursday.
Hancock said the government was formally beginning talks with Warrington, in Cheshire, about moving it into the highest alert level, tier 3.
In tier 2, hospitality businesses such as pubs and restaurants are allowed to remain open but people are only allowed to visit them with members of their own household, or support bubble.
Stoke-on-Trent, in Staffordshire, has a population of 256,375, Coventry's population is 371,521, and 149,539 live in Slough, in Berkshire, according to a 2019 mid-year estimate by the Office for National Statistics.
Responding in the Commons, the shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, pressed the government over its decision not to follow the guidance of scientific advisers and enact a nationwide "circuit breaker" lockdown.
He expressed concern that the approach taken by ministers meant tougher action would be necessary in the coming weeks. "We're only in autumn, winter has not hit us yet," he said.
Hancock pledged to give councils stronger enforcement powers to shut premises on public health grounds "without delay". He told MPs: "As part of local discussions … local authorities including the LGA [Local Government Association] have asked for stronger enforcement powers, and I agree."
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
He added: "The proposals that we'll bring forward will mean councils will be able to act without delay and use closure notices to shut premises on public health grounds to help suppress the virus. We'll work with local authorities in the coming days on the details of these proposals so we can act in a firm and fast way against the minority who are breaching these lifesaving rules."
Hancock said the daily Covid-19 testing capacity was now more than 370,000. "I'm delighted to be able to tell the house that yesterday we began the rollout of lateral flow tests to schools and universities," he said. "Lateral flow tests don't require a lab or a machine – the kit gives you the result within minutes. We've successfully purchased many millions of these tests and they'll allow us both to find the virus where it spreads and to reduce the disruption that virus control measures inevitably create."
The tests will be introduced to councils from Thursday, starting with Stoke-on-Trent.