Rishi Sunak to unveil fourth Covid support package for ailing firms
Chancellor to meet employers groups and unions amid pressure from lockdown-hit areas
Rishi Sunak is expected to announce his fourth package of support for business in as many months amid mounting pressure on the government to help hard-hit companies in lockdown-affected regions.
Trades unions and the UK's five big employers' organisations have been summoned to the Treasury on Thursday morning to hear details of the chancellor's plans before he makes a statement to MPs.
Sunak, who has scrapped plans for a three-year spending review in favour of a stopgap one-year settlement, will tell the Commons that the prospects for the economy are getting bleaker as more and more of the country faces tougher restrictions to combat the Covid-19 pandemic.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
In a week dominated by the government's row with Greater Manchester over financial support, and with 26,688 new coronavirus cases and 191 deaths announced on Wednesday, the chancellor will seek to rebut criticism that not enough is being done by underlining £200bn of Treasury support since the crisis began.
But Sunak has been looking at a number of options for providing further help after becoming increasingly downbeat about the prospects for jobs in the months ahead.
These include whether the two-thirds wage subsidy for workers furloughed from the hospitality sector in tier 3 areas – those with the most stringent restrictions – is generous enough, and whether enough is being done to assist bars and restaurants in tier 2, which are not being forced to close but have seen takings plummet since the ban on households mixing indoors.
One plan under consideration is extending the eligibility for business grants, which are currently only available to businesses ordered to close altogether. These are worth £1,500 every three weeks for larger firms, and £1,000 for smaller ones.
After a flurry of measures when the crisis began, Sunak cut VAT and stamp duty in his eat-out-to-help-out mini budget in July and announced support for part-time workers in his September winter economic plan. This was followed by his plan to support hospitality workers laid off due to tier 3 measures earlier this month.
The shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, Bridget Phillipson, said: "Every intervention he makes is clearly rushed and sooner or later falls apart. They need to take a step back and sort out the relationship between health and economic strategy."
Ministers are particularly concerned about the hospitality industry in London, which accounts for almost a quarter of the UK economy and is currently in tier 2, but will not want to be seen to favouring the capital at a time when north-south feelings in England are running high.
Calls for Sunak to bolster his support have intensified, despite official figures showing that the UK borrowed more in the first six months of the current financial year than it did in the worst year of the banking crisis of the late 2000s.
The Conservative mayor of Birmingham, Andy Street, has called for more help for the city's businesses, which are also under tier 2 measures.
The Warrington South MP exhorted the government to do more to help hospitality businesses in the Commons on Thursday, saying local pubs had told him the drop-off in trade had made their businesses unsustainable. "Now is the time for hospitality sectors in particular, in tier 2, to get sector-specific support," Andy Carter said.
Torsten Bell, the director of the Resolution Foundation thinktank, said: "The big picture of this autumn is economic policy taking time to catch up with the reality that the virus is growing, not shrinking. That changes radically what we're trying to achieve, and increases the priority of protecting people's incomes.
"Instead of ad hoc negotiations like those we've seen with Greater Manchester this week, we need a national policy that's fit for purpose."
The TUC called for an immediate increase in basic universal credit to £260 a week, while the Federation of Small Businesses said there was a need to extend the support on offer in tier 3 to the self-employed and to supply chains.
The TUC general secretary, Frances O'Grady, said: "Tightening restrictions are going to have a massive impact on businesses - especially in sectors like hospitality. The government needs to recognise this and ensure working people have the financial support they need to get through the winter.
"That's why we are calling for 80% of workers' wages to be covered when firms are forced to close. And for ministers to help companies experiencing reduced demand by making the short-time working scheme more generous and lowering employer contributions."