Cummings lockdown trip undermined government, says ex-civil service chief
Lord Sedwill says it was a 'mistake' for Boris Johnson's chief aide to drive to Durham
The former head of the civil service has acknowledged that the UK government's efforts to enforce coronavirus lockdown restrictions were undermined by Dominic Cummings' trip to Country Durham at the height of the first wave of the pandemic.
While Boris Johnson said his chief aide had acted "reasonably" when he drove to County Durham after his wife developed Covid symptoms, Mark Sedwill said it was a "mistake".
"It was clearly a difficult moment for the government. It was a mistake – whether everyone should quit every time they make a mistake, I don't think is right.
"But it clearly undermined the government's coherent narrative about people following the rules."
Lord Sedwill, who stood down last month as cabinet secretary, also said there were "legitimate" questions about Whitehall's preparedness for the coronavirus outbreak.
However, he said some of the criticism had been misplaced and that off-the-briefings attacks on its performance had been "damaging" to good governance.
Sedwill, who was appointed cabinet secretary under Theresa May, stepped down after reportedly clashing with Cummings. He was one of a number of senior officials to leave in the months after Johnson became prime minister last year.
Speaking to the BBC, he rejected suggestions that their departures had been part of a campaign to get rid of officials ministers did not like, saying the situation was "more complex".
"Governments want people they have confidence in, of course," he said. "We go through periods of this kind when there's perceived to be an attack on the underlying values of the civil service, but actually, those values and the institutions serving governments with impartiality have always prevailed and I'm confident they will continue to do so."
However, he said that attacks in the press on senior officials over Brexit and other issues had been "unpleasant" and damaging.
"It is damaging to good governance and those responsible should recognise the damage they're doing, even if they're indulging themselves in some short-term tactical ploy," he said.
Sedwill said it would be for a future inquiry to determine whether the lockdown in March was imposed quickly enough and whether the state had the right capabilities to deal with a pandemic.
"Although we had exercised and prepared for pandemic threats, we didn't have in place the exact measures, and we hadn't rehearsed the exact measures," he said.
"I think there is a genuine question about whether we could have been better prepared in the first place and that is obviously a very legitimate challenge."