UK Covid death toll rises by 241 in highest daily increase for months
Government data shows a further 21,330 lab-confirmed cases of coronavirus
The UK death toll from coronavirus rose by 241 on Tuesday – the highest daily reported rise since the first wave of the pandemic.
While the Tuesday total is often larger because of a delay in reporting deaths over the weekend, this week's is nevertheless the highest figure since 5 June.
Last month, the government's chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, warned the UK was on course for 200 deaths a day by mid-November. The latest daily total suggests the deadly impact of the virus is running ahead of his prediction.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
The government's official coronavirus death toll for the UK since the pandemic began is now 43,967.
Separate figures compiled by the UK's statistics agencies show there have now been 58,164 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. The government toll is based on people who died within 28 days of a first positive test result for coronavirus.
The government said, as of 9am on Tuesday, there had been a further 21,330 lab-confirmed cases of Covid in the UK, bringing the total number to 762,542. Vallance had suggested there could be 50,000 cases a day by mid-October.
Dr Yvonne Doyle, the medical director of Public Health England, said: "The trend in deaths is rising sharply. Tragically we know that older people and those with underlying health conditions tend to suffer more if they become unwell. We all have a responsibility to follow the restrictions to help stop the virus spreading to those who are at greater risk.
"The measures across the country are there to reduce transmission of the virus, which is why it is essential that we all follow them. We know that the easiest and best way to protect each other is to regularly wash our hands, wear a face covering when required and to keep space from each other."
On Saturday, new restrictions came into force imposing further curbs on more than half the population of England in an attempt to halt the renewed spread of the virus.
On Friday, Northern Ireland closed schools, pubs and restaurants in a set of new restrictions to last four weeks, with the exception of schools, which will shut for two weeks.
Scotland introduced new rules for the hospitality sector on Friday, while Wales will enter a two-week "firebreak" lockdown from this Friday.