Greater Manchester: Burnham condemns ministers as tier 3 talks collapse
Mayor says area is facing 'winter of real hardship' as talks on support package break down
Greater Manchester is facing "a winter of real hardship" including business closures, job losses and homelessness after the government dramatically walked out of talks over the implementation of England's strictest coronavirus regulations, Andy Burnham has said.
Addressing the media in central Manchester, Greater Manchester's mayor condemned the government's "game of poker" approach to the negotiations as tier 3 measures looked set to be imposed on the region of 2.8 million people.
Burnham said Greater Manchester's 10 council leaders had asked for £65m from Boris Johnson's government, which he said was the "the bare minimum to prevent a winter of real hardship here that is what we believe we needed to prevent poverty, to prevent hardship to prevent homelessness".
He said Robert Jenrick, the communities secretary, walked away from the talks at 2pm after refusing to increase the government's offer of £60m.
Burnham said it had turned into a "game of poker with people's lives" and the government's actions amounted to a "deliberate act of levelling down".
To cheers in central Manchester, the mayor said he was still willing to do a deal with the government but he added: "It cannot be on the terms that the government offered today because on those things I could not meet the commitments I made to people on the lowest incomes, to people who are self employed, to the freelancers in this city, who need our support, I could not do it on those terms.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
"How can we carry the public with us through this pandemic if we are forcing them to lose their income, their place of work, without supporting them through that? How is that going to help people … to fight this virus?
"Finally I don't believe we can proceed as a country on this basis through the pandemic, by grinding communities down, through punishing financial negotiations. We are asking a lot of the public at this difficult time. And we need to carry them with us, not crush their spirit. We need national unity."