Rapid one-hour Covid tests begin at Heathrow airport
Coronavirus tests that cost £80 offered to travellers to Hong Kong
Passengers flying from London Heathrow to Hong Kong will be able to have a rapid Covid-19 test at the airport before checking in, after the UK's first pre-departure facility opened on Tuesday.
The tests, which must be pre-booked, cost £80 and results will be available within an hour.
Although a very limited number of passengers are expected to use the facility this week, the move is regarded as a significant breakthrough in demonstrating the possibility of clearing passengers as healthy before travel and potentially ending quarantine rules.
However, the first day of operation also highlighted the hurdles to be overcome, as Italy, expected to be part of the launch, declined to recognise the tests on offer at the new facility at Heathrow.
A spokeswoman for Collinson, the medical and security assistance firm providing the tests, said that Italy was clarifying its position on the Lamp – or loop-mediated isothermal amplification – test used at Heathrow, but the facility would also move to introduce antigen tests in line with Italian requirements in the coming weeks.
British Airways, Virgin Atlantic and Cathay Pacific, which all fly routes that require pre-departure tests, will be the first airlines to offer it, according to Collinson and its partner in the facility, Swissport.
The Lamp test uses a throat and nose swab and differs from a PCR test, which is used by the NHS, because it can be processed quickly without being sent to a laboratory.
Anyone entering England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland from somewhere that is not on that country's list of exempt travel corridors is required to go into self-isolation for 14 days.
You can't get round the rules by using a different airport. For instance, as of 4 September travellers returning to Wales and Scotland from Portugal are required to quarantine. This is true even if they fly into an English airport, despite Portugal still being on England's green list.
Everyone entering the UK, including British nationals, must fill in a passenger locator form, regardless of whether or not they need to quarantine. The form asks travellers to provide their contact details and UK address.If someone who is required to self-isolate does not provide an address, the government will arrange accommodation at the traveller's expense.
For 14 days, starting from the day after arrival, people who are quarantining should not:
The quarantine rules apply to everyone apart from selected groups of people such as freight drivers, very regular business travellers, and politicians or other dignitaries.
The travel restrictions are being frequently updated, and are available on the relevant government and administration websites linked to here, with separate lists covering England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
The tests will be carried out by Collinson nurses in new facilities within Heathrow terminals 2 and 5. Passengers must book their test online with Collinson before going to the airport.
The swab will be processed at the airport by staff from one of Collinson's biotech partners, Prenetics.
John Holland-Kaye, the chief executive of Heathrow airport, said: "Many other countries are already using testing to keep their borders safe while restarting trade and travel. These facilities will make it easier for passengers going to those countries to get a test and have the potential to provide a service for arriving passengers."
Collinson and Swissport have built a test-on-arrival facility at Heathrow that needs UK government approval before it can be used.
The aviation industry is urging the government to launch a testing regime that provides a safe alternative to the 14-day quarantine. Pre-departure testing is regarded as a crucial step – but its impact will remain minor for most travellers until international, reciprocal agreements are in place.
David Evans, the Collinson joint chief executive, said: "With countries around the world adding the UK to their list of 'high risk' countries, we need to find a way to work with governments, leading travel brands and other commercial entities to safely open up travel out of the UK."
Grant Shapps, the UK transport secretary, has said a "test-and-release system" to cut the quarantine period for international arrivals to the UK should be in place by 1 December.
Gatwick is also investigating possible tests but the price of tests is thought to be more of a deterrent for short-haul leisure passengers, who may have paid less for the flight.
EasyJet, the biggest airline at Gatwick, said it was in the process of investigating trials for its customers. A spokeswoman said: "In the longer term a standard scheme of testing on departures across Europe is key as it will be simpler and provide more certainty for passengers."