Boris Johnson wrongly suggests new rules will stop some parents seeing children
Children are allowed to move between homes of separated parents even at peak of lockdown
Boris Johnson has famously not always seemed on top of the ever-changing coronavirus lockdown rules, but the prime minister has made perhaps his most basic error so far, by suggesting that new restrictions mean separated parents might not be able to see their children.
Responding to a question at a televised Downing Street press conference on Friday, the prime minister said that while people should check the rules, "alas", some parents might face restrictions on seeing children.
This is not only incorrect, but has been so throughout Covid restrictions, with children allowed to move between the homes of separated parents even during the peak of lockdown in March.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
The question came in a video from a parent called Chris Eldridge in Margate, Kent, which is currently in the lowest of the three-tier system for Covid regulations.
Eldridge's query was whether he might encounter problems in seeing his son, who lives in Essex, almost all of which will be moved into the middle tier on Friday night.
"You should go on the website, obviously, and check, but when places go into a higher tier from the basic medium, then there are restrictions on household contact, alas," Johnson said. "So, depending on how you define your household, you may find there are restrictions."
This is not correct. A briefing by the House of Commons library about the new rules notes that the latest, issued on Wednesday, state that in all three tiers, restrictions of meetings do not apply "for the purposes of arrangements for access to, and contact between, parents and children where the children do not live in the same household as their parents or one of their parents".
Eldridge said he was left "shouting at the television" after Johnson failed to answer his question. He said: "I felt he was just pushing it by the wayside, by saying to go on the website.
"I was on the website, I had to go on the website to submit my question. Obviously, I had gone to the website to try and find the answer to my situation. Considering all the steps you go through to submit a question, it would have been a lot easier, a lot quicker, to get my answer if I were to find it on their website.
"Initially I didn't pick up on the fact he said there might be restrictions. Five minutes later I got forwarded an article that actually gave me the answer I was looking for."
Eldridge lives apart from his six-year-old son and during the peak of the pandemic, he did not see him for seven weeks, due to fears of putting him at risk.
He said: "It was hard going from seeing him every weekend, but fortunately with a bit of technology I could still speak to him, but that's not the same thing."
He added: "I understand that the government aren't going to be able to provide an answer to everybody's situation, but you can see that my situation is going to be the sort of thing that's troubling quite a few people."
A Downing Street spokesman confirmed that there was "an exemption for any kind of childcare for separated parents in all tiers", adding: "The point the PM made is you need to check the website because you'll know how you define your household."
Johnson has struggled on Covid rules several times in the past. Last month he apologised for having "misspoken" after wrongly suggesting that the "rule of six" limit on public gatherings did not apply outdoors in north-east England.