'Crazy, isn't it?' Devon resort reports no shortage of visitors
Woolacombe expects a half-term boost – but there are fears that the extra people could bring Covid
A bright, breezy day in north Devon. Hundreds of people are taking bracing walks along Woolacombe beach. The pubs, cafes, fast-food outlets and surf shops are doing excellent business.
From 2 December, England will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system.
Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume.
Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The"rule of six"will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed.
Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 1 can be foundhere.
Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close.
As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors.
Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000.
Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 2 can be foundhere.
Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3.
The full government rules and guidance for tier 3 can be foundhere.
"Actually we've had an amazing season," said Roger Ashford, whose B&amp;B, the Imperial, enjoys stunning views of the surf. "It's never been so busy here. There are a couple of hundred people out there walking on the beach now, it's unreal."
Ashford, like most of the hospitality businesses in the village, has reduced his capacity to meet Covid restrictions. But over this autumn half-term his B&amp;B is as full as it can be. "We could fill up twice over easily. People are desperate to get away. Crazy, isn't it?"
Places like Woolacombe are expecting a late-season boost this half-term. But it does come with the risk that visitors could bring the virus into spots that have so far largely escaped.
Over at the Red Barn pub in Woolacombe, Roger's cousin, Angus Ashford, said he knew people from tier 2 areas who were already in the village and that more were bound to come at half-term.
The pub has worked hard to keep its visitors and staff safe. "But there is a risk," he said. "Visitors come here from Birmingham, Bristol, London. If you get some waves and some sunshine, people will come if there is no travel ban."
During half-term more than 1,000 families are booked into the four holiday centres run by Woolacombe Bay Holiday Parks.
Kevin Darvill, the sales and marketing manager, said the different travel restrictions across England and Wales were making life difficult. The holiday parks have, with huge regret, had to stop people coming from Welsh lockdown areas where people are not allowed by law to leave without good reason.
But it has been trickier to tell people from areas of high infection in England not to come because the UK government has not imposed the same firm ban. "English customers are bamboozled and we're bamboozled too," he said.
Andrew Baragwanath, the national chairman of the British Holiday and Home Parks Association and a partner in the Ayr Holiday Park in St Ives, Cornwall, said he was sure people from high-risk areas continued to come to the south-west. He said a holiday business owner could not be expected to be a "tourism policeman".
The presence of lifeguards on some Cornish beaches until the end of October shows the holiday season is very much still on.
Councillor Rob Nolan, a member of Cornwall council's cabinet and the owner of a B&amp;B in Truro, said the message there was that the county remained open.
Nolan conceded that some people were anxious at the prospect of people arriving from areas of high Covid prevalence and a few probably liked the idea of closing the border.
"Cornwall is open but anxious," he said. "We want people who come down to be sensible. Book ahead and don't come if you have symptoms. Wear a mask, be prepared to sanitise."
Other areas across England are taking the same approach. The Liberal Democrat MP Tim Farron, who represents the Cumbrian constituency of Westmorland and Lonsdale, said visitors would still travel to the Lake District over half-term.
"I think that so long as people are compliant with the rules and respectful of local communities, people are happy for visitors to come," he said.
The ban coming into force in Wales on Friday evening to stop people travelling into the country from hotspots in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland is a blow to holiday businesses there. The prospect of a circuit-breaker lockdown for the whole country is also deeply troubling for holiday businesses.
On Friday MWT Cymru, which represents 600 tourism businesses in mid Wales, was still making the point on its website that its region is still open. Its chairman, Rowland Rees-Evans, said people had worked tirelessly to keep the sector going this summer and autumn but business owners felt very worried now.
"The region has one of the lowest Covid-19 rates in the UK, which is a reflection on who we are in mid-Wales, the way our visitors, communities and businesses have all pulled together to protect our fragile economy whilst keeping everyone safe."
The Association of Scotland's Self-Caterers expressed concern that the Scottish government could follow the Welsh administration and impose a travel ban. Its chief executive, Fiona Campbell, said: "The unwarranted restrictions already imposed on Scottish self-catering have had a severely negative impact on our sector.
"Across our £723m industry, we've seen scores of bookings cancelled resulting in many self-catering operators facing uncertain futures with some even taking the ultimate decision of closing down completely.
"To hear that the first minister and her government are now entertaining the idea of imposing a travel ban further adds to the fear and uncertainty spreading throughout our sector and across Scottish tourism more generally."
