Bangor put into local lockdown amid sharp rise in Covid-19 cases
Limits placed on movement in and out of area without a 'reasonable excuse'
New coronavirus restrictions are being introduced in Bangor following a sharp rise in cases, the Welsh government has announced.
From 6pm on Saturday, people will not be allowed to enter or leave the area without a "reasonable excuse" and can only meet people they do not live with outdoors, it said.
The new restrictions will apply to everyone living in the eight wards that make up the city.
They come in response to a "significant cluster of cases", with outbreaks appearing to be "closely associated with young people and students", the Welsh government said.
The incident rate was around 400 cases per 100,000 people, it added.
The first minister, Mark Drakeford, said in a statement on Friday: "Unfortunately, we have seen a large number of cases in Bangor, which is largely linked to people socialising. We have worked closely with the local authority, the police in north Wales and public health experts to assess the need for local restrictions. We all agree about the need to take targeted action in Bangor.
"We want to discuss the wider situation in Gwynedd in more detail tomorrow to decide whether we need to extend local restrictions more widely across the county area."
The new measures come after the Welsh government announced that children living under local lockdown restrictions in Wales will be allowed to travel for sporting activities outside their county boundaries.
Fifteen counties are currently subjected to the restrictions, which prohibit people from entering or leaving an area without a reasonable excuse such as work or education.
Almost 10,000 people signed a petition calling for children to be able to travel to maintain training in their chosen sports with their clubs.
Speaking at the Welsh government's coronavirus press conference, Drakeford said the regulations would be amended to allow for the change.
But he warned that Covid-19 was "waking up for winter" and said the government was working to "turn back the tide", but only restricting freedoms when necessary.
He added: "Last week, we changed the local restriction rules to enable people who live alone and are single parents to form a temporary bubble with another household in their local authority area to deal with loneliness and isolation.
"Now, we intend to amend the regulations to allow children to take part in organised sporting activity, if these take place outside their county boundaries."
Drakeford said that where local restrictions had been in place for longest – in parts of south-east Wales – there was evidence that Covid-19 was "beginning to come under control". In Blaenau Gwent, there were more than 300 cases of the virus per 100,000 people, but this has now reduced to less than 100 cases per 100,000 people.