Trump lawyer Rudy Giuliani coughs his way through anti-mask interview
Giuliani, awaiting the results of a Covid test, in spluttering Fox News exchange criticizes Joe Biden for wearing a mask
Days after being diagnosed with the coronavirus – a highly infectious airborne virus that has already killed over a million people around the world, the US president was out of his hospital bed.
Despite 12 of his inner circle already testing positive for the virus and presumably more to come, Trump was out waving at fans on Sunday. He returned to the White House last night from the hospital, mask-free again, claiming he might already be immune, despite his chief physician warning that he's not out of the woods yet.
Enter Rudy Giuliani, Trump's personal lawyer, who decided to spend Monday night coughing through an interview with Martha MacCallum on Fox News, announcing that the science on Covid is in fact baloney, and with it the science on mask-wearing, too.
That Giuliani is anti-mask is not surprising. He did, after all, spend the last week indoors with the president, sans mask, as he helped Trump prep for the presidential debates. But you'd think Giuliani might soften his stance on masks, considering that since he and Chris Christie were trapped in a room with the president , that Christie has since tested positive for the virus, and that he and the president were both hospitalized.
Giuliani has, at least, taken heed and gotten a test – he confirmed on MacCallum's show that he is awaiting the results of a second coronavirus test. But the fact the interview took place just two hours after his test (and without the results yet in) did not stop Giuliani gloating that he had not yet contracted Covid-19 and dishing out advice to Fox's viewership.
"Just to play devil's advocate, [Biden] would probably say, 'I haven't gotten Covid and the president did, and he's not a big fan of wearing masks'," pointed out MacCallum, before being interjected by Giuliani.
"And I haven't either, and I don't wear masks as much as probably I should … What they claim is science is nonsense," said Giuliani.
Moments later, Giuliani again began coughing and hacking, prompting MacCallum to close with well wishes.
"Mayor Giuliani, thank you so much for your time, and we look forward to having you back. And I hope that cough is not anything bad while you are waiting for your test to come back," she said, adding: "We hope you will be healthy and well."
"I hope so, too," said Giuliani. "I will let you know tomorrow."