Prayers and criticism as public figures react to Trump Covid news
Sympathy for president and first lady but coronavirus diagnoses no surprise, say some
Politicians and other public figures in the US and around the world have reacted to Donald Trump's Covid diagnosis by offering well-wishes, while some pointed out that the president had repeatedly downplayed the dangers of the pandemic and undermined public health guidelines.
A government spokesperson in France wished the US leader a swift recovery but questioned Trump's repeated dismissals of the risks of the disease. "This demonstrates that the virus spares no one, including those who have shown scepticism," Gabriel Attal said.
State-controlled media in China, a country Trump has sought to blame for the pandemic, was more cutting: "President Trump and the first lady have paid the price for his gamble to play down the Covid-19," tweeted Hu Xijin, editor in chief of China's Global Times newspaper.
In the US, words of support came from across the political divide. Trump's election rival, Joe Biden, said he was praying "for the health and safety of the president and his family."
Rev Jessie Jackson, the civil rights activist, wrote: "We must all pray for the full recovery of the president [and] his wife. For whatever religious or political persuasion you may be, we must all pray as millions of people are affected by this disease."
When the pandemic struck, Jackson had written to Trump urging testing for the 2.2 million people incarcerated in the US – many of whom have died or fallen ill as serious outbreaks spread through the prison system.
Rachel Maddow – a host on MSBNC who has been highly critical of the president – wrote: "God bless the president and the first lady. If you pray, please pray for their speedy and complete recovery – and for everyone infected, everywhere."
Tulsi Gabbard, the congresswoman for Hawaii who ran for the Democratic presidential nomination, sent "best wishes … during this difficult time".
Ashish Jha, the dean of the Brown University School of Public Health, said Trump's diagnosis "is a total failure" by the White House team to protect the president.
World leaders, including the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, and the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, who himself contracted coronavirus, also offered support.
The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, opted for a telegram to wish Trump a swift recovery. "I am certain that your inherent vitality, good spirits and optimism will help you cope with this dangerous virus," the message read.
Many others pointed out that Trump, who has flouted public health recommendations, refusing to wear a mask to protect himself and others from the spread of disease, should have expected this outcome.
The writer Tracy Clayton recalled the moment when the president had suggested people might inject bleach as a treatment for the disease.
George Conway, an outspoken critic of Trump and a lawyer who is married to former Trump adviser Kellyanne Conway, wrote: "He failed to protect the country. He couldn't even protect himself."