'Build back better'? Boris Johnson's plan must start with wrecked public services
From councils to health and social care to housing, Covid-19 has laid bare the destruction wrought by a decade of austerity
Boris Johnson has promised to "build back better" after the pandemic. But to stand any chance of improving public services, the government has to understand the significance of the wreckage around us.
Covid-19 has laid bare the destruction caused by a decade of austerity. Everywhere there is a lack of capacity, from too few respirators to threadbare public health teams in local authorities. Every part of the system was running hot, so when the virus hit, one of the wealthiest countries on Earth was quickly tipped into crisis. Tens of thousands of deaths from disrupted healthcare could follow.
With local government reduced to little more than a skeleton operation, towns and cities were entirely dependent on government handouts to cope. The folly of running our social care system on minimum wages and zero-hours contracts was cruelly exposed as underpaid staff moved between homes to make ends meet, unwittingly taking the infection with them.
Meanwhile, decades of underinvestment in social housing ensured the virus ripped through our most deprived communities, with overcrowded homes and shared facilities providing the perfect breeding ground for the infection.
Outstanding political leadership might still have been able to turn this desperately unpromising situation around, but a combination of excessive centralisation of power and poor ministerial decisions made things much worse.
Having failed to prioritise pandemic planning in the annual ministerial instructions to Public Health England (PHE) – the top priority for 2019-20 was Brexit – the health secretary, Matt Hancock, decided to build his entire pandemic response on private sector amateurs rather than public sector experts. He sidelined local government public health teams, NHS laboratories and PHE's regional health protection teams in favour of huge outsourced contracts for critical infrastructure such as testing, tracing and analysing.
So what would building back better after this train wreck look like? Power needs to be local where possible, central where necessary. The fury of Gateshead council's leader, Martin Gannon, at ministers' refusal to allow his authority, instead of private sector contractors, to run the local test and trace operation, and the government's chaotic introduction of restrictions there, shows how the suffocating grip of central government is stopping communities from moving quickly and effectively to counter infection surges.
Government needs to accept that its obsession with contracting out is wasting money and delivering poor results. Of course the private sector has a role, but the default position of using vastly expensive and unwieldy contracts for complex, people-focused services from prisons to test and trace does not work.
Virtually every part of the public sector needs more staff, from filling the tens of thousands of NHS vacancies to providing the skills and capacity in the civil service to end excessive dependence on consultants.
Public health needs to be brought out of the shadows and put at the heart of public services. While its roots need to be in local government, it also needs to be a shared responsibility across Whitehall, not just the health department. The pandemic has shown how public health permeates everything from industrial production to transport. It needs to be integral to public policy.
And of course the social care crisis needs solving. Building back better wouldn't be just throwing more money at the system, but having a national debate about what sort of old age we want for ourselves. Both the goal and the funding are solvable – it is a question of political will.
Could any of this happen? At present the government seems more interested in sideshows such as picking a battle with the BBC than developing a coherent vision for a post-pandemic country. But if "build back better" is to be anything other than the latest throwaway slogan, it needs to start with public services.
Richard Vize is a public policy commentator and analyst