Covid quarantine for Western Australia's Fifo workers compared to 'house arrest'
One worker has spent his entire time in WA at home, unable to leave or to have visitors
A fly-in-fly-out worker and resident of Western Australia has described not being able to see family or go out for months because of the state's strict border closure.
Dave, who did not want his full name used for fear of losing his job, works in the Northern Territory. Although fly-in fly-out workers are exempt from having to apply for the police permit that most people require to enter the state, they still must quarantine for 14 days on their return at a police-approved location.
Dave works on a two-weeks on, two-weeks off roster, which means for the past six months, since the border closed, he has spent his entire time in Western Australia at home, unable to leave or to have visitors.
"I now spend my entire rest and recovery time stuck at home with no visits from friends or family," Dave told Guardian Australia. "With our premier [Mark McGowan] wanting to keep the borders closed until mid-next year, it will then mean that unless I quit my job I will have been forced into essentially house arrest for an entire year."
Dave said he cannot afford to quit his job. He lives with his girlfriend, who he said is also becoming distressed at having to isolate in a separate room of their house when he is back, and from being unable to go out and do activities with him. "We need the domestic borders open to save the people of this country," he said.
Under Western Australia border requirements, those approved entry into the state and ordered into quarantine must undergo a Covid-19 test at the airport as soon as they arrive, and a second test at an approved hospital on day 11 of their quarantine period.
"Despite my negative result coming in the following day, I still have to remain in isolation through to day 14," Dave said. "Sadly I look forward to this day 11 trip for testing because it's the only time I get to venture past the letterbox. My mental health is the worst it has been in years."
A spokesman for the Australian Workers Union (AWU) said while other states, such as Queensland, also had strict border entry requirements, they were not as onerous towards fly-in fly-out workers, and that most of these workers were based in Western Australia.
The AWU national secretary, Daniel Walton, said the situation was "heartbreaking".
"While the union understood the public health imperative driving WA's hard border policy, it has created unprecedented difficulties for Fifo workers," he said.
"In response, early in the pandemic crisis, the AWU negotiated hard with employers to ensure a significant number of Fifo workers were able to relocate permanently to WA with their families for at least the duration of the hard border period.
"The AWU also negotiated with employers that those quarantining were paid. Of course in many cases relocating families has been impossible, and these workers have obviously been under huge stress for months now. It's a really heartbreaking situation."He said the compulsory quarantine measures were having "very real and very concerning mental health ramifications" on workers.
"Because of this we are engaging constantly with government, industry and regulators to ensure those who are quarantining are provided the support they need."
Polls suggest the border closures have largely been popular within the state.
Western Australia's chief health officer, Andy Robertson, will be questioned on the state's hard borders when he faces the state parliament's education and health standing committee on Wednesday afternoon.
Robertson has warned that just one community case could spark a large outbreak because WA has largely removed restrictions on physical distancing. The state has 18 active Covid-19 cases. Seven are crew members of the Vega Dream iron ore bulk carrier, which is anchored 22 nautical miles off the coast of Port Hedland after arriving from Manila.
With Australian Associated Press