NSW minister says he has evidence of Queensland premier's 'political agenda' on Covid response
Brad Hazzard refuses to say what his evidence is, as he accuses Annastacia Palaszczuk of a 'cruel approach' to border restrictions
The New South Wales health minister, Brad Hazzard, claims he has evidence that the Queensland premier is playing "political games" with her state's hard southern border, but has refused to give details.
NSW case numbers have spiked again after nearly two weeks of no local Covid-19 cases. On Friday the state recorded 10 new cases, five in hotel quarantine, and five from known close contacts of existing cases and clusters.
When Hazzard was asked on Radio National on Friday why it was wrong for Annastacia Palaszczuk to protect Queenslanders by imposing strict requirements on NSW contact tracing for Covid-19 cases, Hazzard said: "If that were the only reason that would be entirely appropriate.
"But it's not the reason. The reason is that she just decided that she's in an election phase, and she is playing games basically with the rest of the community."
Asked what evidence he had for the claim, the minister replied: "I have the evidence, we're not going to share that. But there's no doubt about it, it is a political exercise."
Hazzard refused to provide any further explanation when pushed by the presenter, Hamish Macdonald.
"It is a political agenda. It's as simple as that. I'm not going to go into how or why I know that, but I do know that," he said.
"The date she keeps mentioning is the date straight after the election. Why would it go straight after the election? Well, there is only one reason, because she's focused entirely on the political outcomes. She believes it's a political advantage to her.
"This is a completely reprehensible, uncaring and cruel approach by the Queensland premier. I haven't criticised any other premier or any other minister during the country during this because we've all worked together. Premier Palaszczuk – it is about time she woke up to the fact that politics and looking after patients and families don't mix. Just cut it out."
Palaszczuk has repeatedly stated that NSW must go 28 days without community transmission before Queensland will relax restrictions on its southern border, a threshold the NSW premier has labelled as unrealistic.
When NSW recorded three mystery cases on Wednesday, Queensland originally gave authorities 48 hours to link the infection to a known outbreak, otherwise the 28-day count would start afresh. Hazzard said this timeline was not based on health advice.
"That has never been imposed by anybody throughout the entire country. So that's another plucked non-evidence-based decision for the premier," he said.
"I deal with families every day who are asking for exemptions. We have exemption arrangements in New South Wales that are worked out on the right balance of care and caution, but also compassion. And I think what we're seeing up in Queensland now is a lack of compassion and driven by a political agenda."
Palaszczuk's office has been contacted for comment. She has maintained throughout that she is acting solely on the medical advice of her chief health officer, Dr Jeannette Young.
This two-day timeline has since been walked back. Young said on Friday that she would continue watching the situation before deciding to reset the 28-day border clock, saying she was feeling "more confident" in NSW's contact tracing capacity.
"We just need to wait a bit longer before we decide whether or not there's been any need to change that planned opening to New South Wales," Young said.
"They have a further 10 cases today. Five of them in hotel quarantine which of course aren't any risk at all and then five in the community.
"But for all five of them, they know how they've acquired those cases … So NSW has extremely good contact tracing capability and they're using that at the moment."
Queensland recorded no new cases on Friday, marking their own 28 days without community transmission.
But health minister and deputy premier Steven Miles did not share Young's optimism about their southern neighbour.
He said he was disappointed NSW didn't want to "share the aspiration" to control community transmission, as other states and territories did.
"They've effectively given up on that goal of 28 days of no unlinked transmission," he said.
NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian hit back against this assertion in her own press conference.
"Zero community transmission is of course our aspiration," Berejiklian told reporters on Friday.
"All I'm saying to other states is look at what we're burdening in NSW, look at the GST contribution you get from us on average. Share the burden a little bit.
"I could easily say 'zero community cases' if I only had 700 quarantine people per week. We've got 3,000."
NSW Health said four of the state's new locally acquired cases are associated with a private health clinic cluster.
Authorities said the fifth community transmission is likely an old case most likely acquired when the virus was circulating at low levels in southwest Sydney in August.
"[Of the] four that were identified overnight in relation to the private clinic, three of those are in one household, which is of some comfort given that it is not multiple sources at this stage," Berejiklian said.
But people who had tested positive for Covid-19 visited a number of places during their infectious window.
"Obviously we are concerned because, as you see on the list of venues, they are across a wide range of suburbs," the premier said.
One of these locations is Potts Point restaurant Monopole. Authorities have begun contact tracing after an infectious person visited on 4 October from 6pm to 8pm.
While close and casual contacts will be approached by the department, NSW authorities have urged anyone who visited the restaurant to monitor for symptoms.
With additional reporting from the Australia Associated Press.