Almost 10% of Australian university jobs slashed during Covid, with casuals hit hardest
Teaching staff say they have been asked to create more reusable course content during the pandemic, which they say makes them more expendable
Nearly 12,500 people have now lost their jobs at Australian universities – with more than half of them casuals – as the economic impact of Covid-19 deepens.
The latest figures, compiled by the the National Tertiary Education Union on 25 September, show that nearly 10% of the entire pre-Covid university workforce of approximately 130,000 people has now been lost.
The figure does not include proposed job cuts or casuals who did not have their contracts renewed.
"It is a gross underestimate of people who have lost their jobs," Alison Barnes, the president of the NTEU, told Guardian Australia.
Casual staff have borne the brunt of the cuts, as the university sector faces an estimated revenue loss of $16bn by 2023. Of the 12,485 confirmed cuts so far, 5,600 are among permanent staff, 399 are fixed-term and 6,486 are casual.
Barnes said the true figure for casuals was likely to be even higher and overall job losses are expected to keep rising throughout the year.
"There are many thousands of casuals we don't know about because they are just let go, their contracts are not renewed, and universities are not compelled to report that information," she said.
At the same time, teaching staff have raised concerns that universities are asking them to generate more recorded and reusable teaching content, which they say makes them more expendable.
Dr Natalia Maystorovich Chulio, a sessional academic and researcher across two universities, told Guardian Australia that lecture slides, course structures and lectures themselves were frequently recorded and replicated at most universities.
Universities commonly own the intellectual property created by their staff, and have the right to replicate some lectures or courses across years, including the online teaching content created during the pandemic.
Maystorovich Chulio said many academics had experienced their content being reused.
"They [the universities] own everything we do, even to the point where I've had lectures of mine, all the slides taken down and reused by other academics who don't know the material," she said.
In one year, she said, she had spent considerable time redesigning and improving an entire unit that "hadn't changed in five or six years".
"Then [a colleague] asked me for my material and I was stupid enough to give slides, and her lectures were just her reading off my slides …
"Now, when I do my lectures, because they are pre-recorded and uploaded to the system, I try and make sure there is something that is current. I try to use Covid as an example, so if they try and use it next year, they can tell this is rehashed material."
Another academic who teaches at a Queensland university, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said he had had a similar experience in the past few weeks.
"When Covid happened we went 100% online," he said. "For my biggest course I pre-recorded the lecture.
"Two weeks ago, I was pushing my coordinator about next year, and whether I will be employed. They said yes, we've got a way to do it where we will use the lectures you have pre-recorded and we can save on the budget that way."
He said this meant he would no longer be paid to give those lectures.
"Having pre-recorded it, I have done myself out of job for my biggest course next year," he said. "I know they can do it under the IP, but it is a different story if they said upfront, we will get you to record them so we can use it in future".
Maystorovich Chulio said students could help stop universities reusing old content if they complained.
"If you're doing a recorded lecture, it's not as good for students. You need to bounce off students," she said.
Barnes said she had also experienced her content being reused.
"Having been on the receiving end of it, it really does suck," she said. "Staff have concerns across the sector, that reusable content will make casuals more disposable and undermine the employment security of ongoing staff."
She said the loss of the 12,500 so far would affect the quality of research and teaching.
"It's bad now, but it is only going to get worse," she said. "It is the decimation of their careers. But this also has a dreadful impact on our universities and our students.
"We will see the loss of incredibly important teaching and research fields, because you will be losing waves and waves of people."
A spokesman for Universities Australia said: "No workplace can take that kind of cut without serious consequences. Maintaining jobs and research capability is our primary concern."
Barnes said neither the $1bn announced in Tuesday's budget for research nor the proposed university funding changes would stop the job losses.
"The budget is not a rescue package," she said, describing the $1bn as a temporary and short-term "sugar hit" that would not properly cover the $7.2bn research funding shortfall this year.
"The jobs-ready package is to squeeze more students into the system, which is not a bad thing, but you do it without any additional funding. This will drive university management to look for even cheaper sources of labour. It will drive insecure work."
Universities Australia estimates that 21,000 full-time jobs in the sector will be lost by the end of the year.