Chadstone butcher coronavirus cluster: what we know so far
Sprawling nature of outbreak and possibility of 'super spreader' event has health authorities on edge
As Victoria comes out of its second wave of Covid-19, attention has returned to curbing individual outbreaks and preventing case numbers from rising again.
Currently, a complex outbreak known as the "Butcher Club–Chadstone shopping centre outbreak" is growing across metropolitan and regional Victoria.
The sprawling nature of the outbreak and the possibility of a "super spreader" event has health authorities on edge. But what exactly do we know about the cluster?
There are 28 cases linked to the Butcher Club-Chadstone shopping centre cluster.
This is made up of at least eight staff, four customers and 11 close household and family close contacts. The department is yet to confirm which categories the remaining five cases fall into.
There is also an additional linked case in Kilmore, which the chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, has confirmed is being counted as a separate cluster for logistical reasons.
Suburbs across Melbourne and a number of regional towns now have confirmed cases connected with the cluster.
These include surrounding communities such as Chadstone, Ashburton and Oakleigh, as well as distant suburbs such as Cranbourne West and Frankston in the south-east, and Melton more than an hour west.
The regional town of Kilmore, an hour north of Melbourne, has had two confirmed cases, and Benalla in central Victoria is on high alert after a Covid-19 positive person travelled there while infectious.
This is the breakdown of affected suburbs as of Sunday 4 October, when the cluster was at 20 cases.
Ashburton: Three
Mulgrave: Three
Cranbourne West: Two
Dandenong North: Two
Abbotsford: One
Frankston: One
Elsternwick: One
Noble Park: One
Mount Waverley: One
Oakleigh: One
Melton: One
Pascoe Vale: One
Bentleigh East: One
Kilmore: One
It is understood that the cluster began with a household outbreak in Frankston.
A number of people from a large home worked as cleaners for the Butcher Club store in Chadstone shopping centre. While some in the home stopped attending work when they became unwell, one woman did not. She is understood to have introduced the virus to the store.
It was originally reported that this woman breached self-isolation orders, but the premier, Daniel Andrews, confirmed on Tuesday this was not the case.
"That was more a person who was symptomatic going to work," he said.
Peter Robinson, co-director of the Butcher Club, spoke to Melbourne radio station 3AW about the start of the outbreak.
"They've been working there for six to eight months. This is the family," he said.
"On Monday of last week, only one of the family members came to work. Our manager sort of questioned that. Thought it was a little bit strange. She said nobody else wanted to come this week. She worked Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday.
"Then she made a call to us on the Thursday [24 September] and said police had attended and explained that the whole family should be isolating, so they [were] unable to come to work. It seems like they should have been isolating and she made a bad decision, clearly."
Robinson said the family were "good people" and "hard workers".
"I think financially she's made a poor decision."
This outbreak has grown quickly, with people who would only be considered "casual" contacts, such as customers, also becoming infected. The chief health officer has suggested this may be due to a super spreader at the store.
"[In some cases] there is only casual contact or [contact] in facilities like the public toilets in Chadstone that might have contributed to this transmission," he said.
"Obviously, that gives us a suspicion that they are linked in some way. And it might be super-spreaders or super-spreading events [where] somebody is particularly infectious."
Sutton clarified that this was not a different, stronger, strain of the virus, but an individual who may have been particularly infectious.
"There are people who have a very high viral load … and they can infect a huge number of other people, and the people who get infected can develop symptoms within one or two days," he said.
Andrews defended Victoria's contact tracing in relation to the outbreak.
"Twenty-eight seems a lot and it is," he said. "But 28 can easily be 280 and it isn't."
The Chadstone cluster spread to regional Victoria through a close contact of a staff member who was travelling through Kilmore on 30 September for permitted work purposes.
Those who live in metropolitan Melbourne are allowed to travel to regional Victoria for work but are expected to still follow the significantly stricter metro restrictions. That means that while regional restaurants and cafes are open, those from the city are only allowed to get take away food and drink.
But this traveller stopped and dined in at the Oddfellows Cafe while unknowingly infectious, leading to at least one confirmed case in a cafe staff member.
As this breach of the health orders was disclosed as part of a contact tracing investigation this person has not been fined.
Kim Short, owner of the Oddfellows Cafe, posted from the cafe's Facebook account to tell customers why they were closing.
"I am devastated to announce that late this afternoon we had the dreaded call from DHHS to say that one of our staff members who was in contact with the customer on Wednesday has tested positive to Covid-19.
"The Cafe will remain closed until Monday the 19th of October or until further notice. All our staff are quarantined &amp; following the DHHS rules."
The chief health officer praised the cafe's cooperation.
"The Kilmore case is an illustration of a cafe that did all of the right things. Has a fantastic register of names, all of those close contacts are being contacted. But there are 150 of them."
Sutton said it's understood the traveller was not aware that they were a close contact when they left Melbourne.
"It wasn't that they were breaking quarantine, it was that they weren't aware that they were a close contact of a positive case," he said.
Another close contact of the traveller in Kilmore has since tested positive.
It has been reported this worker then travelled to the regional city of Benella where they stayed for 90 minutes at the White Line Tyres store. There are currently no cases confirmed in Benalla but contacts have been identified and are being tested.
Anyone who visited Oddfellows Cafe in Kilmore between 30 September and 3 October is classified as a potential close contact and should get tested.
Asymptomatic testing is also available in Kilmore, meaning anyone who feels they could have been exposed can also come forward.
"And obviously, we're asking anyone who has symptoms to isolate and absolutely make sure that they get tested," Sutton said.
Testing is available at the Kilmore &amp; District Hospital, as well as a drive-through pop up clinic which was booked out on Tuesday.
Asymptomatic testing is also available for all staff members at Chadstone shopping centre.
The following connected locations have been added to the Victorian government's "high-risk locations" list. Anyone who attended these locations at the listed time is urged to get tested if they develop even the mildest symptoms.
The Butcher Club, Chadstone shopping centre, Chadstone: 23-26 September
Chadstone shopping centre fresh food precinct, Chadstone: 23-26 September
Coles, Chadstone shopping centre, Chadstone: 27 September
Oddfellows cafe, 36 Sydney Street, Kilmore: 30 September 7am-10am
White Line Tyres, 73 Carrier Street, Benalla: 30 September, 12 noon-3pm