Beach volleyball great Kerri Walsh Jennings faces backlash over mask refusal
Three-time Olympic beach volleyball champion Kerri Walsh Jennings has received backlash on social media after saying she did not wear a mask in public.
On Sunday, Walsh Jennings wrote on Instagram that she had not worn a facemask, something that is widely acknowledged to prevent the spread of Covid-19, during a shopping trip as part of "a little exercise in being brave".
She added: "I read a quote the other day that shook me – – THIS HAS NOT BEEN ENFORCED, IT'S BEEN CONSENTED TO. This statement woke me up &amp; the truth of it has had me obsessing on the matter of how I can mindfully &amp; compassionately stand up for my rights &amp; for the freedoms our constitution has granted us all WITHOUT being reckless or putting anyone else in danger."
One of Walsh Jennings' followers on Instagram wrote: "I'm a nurse and all healthcare workers are reusing PPE and we don't have routine access to testing. We put ourselves at risk daily to care for patients the least that everyone else can do is social distance and wear a mask in public." Other followers also expressed their disquiet at Walsh Jennings' statement.
On Monday, Walsh Jennings posted again alongside an image of a white flag.
"I fully acknowledge that addressing such an emotional, layered, nuanced and polarizing topic on social media was not the smartest thing," she wrote. "We should all carry on RESPECTFULLY living our virtues, standing up for our beliefs and doing our best to do no harm in doing so. I was not looking to do anything but express my belief that FREEDOM IS RIGHT WORTH FIGHTING FOR … I am not advocating for people to stop wearing masks. I wear a mask most often. I don't believe in their efficacy unless it's of a certain caliber, yet I wear them. I am advocating critical thinking and civility. I am advocating personal responsibility."
Covid-19 has killed nearly 190,000 people in America and infected more than 6.3 million. Walsh Jennings' home state of California has recorded the most cases in the US with 743,000 positive tests since the start of the pandemic.