Energy retailers at risk due to nonpaying customers and higher costs during pandemic
Energy demand decreased by 17% for small businesses and 11% for large consumers, but increased by 21% for residential consumers
The Covid-19 pandemic has increased the risk that multiple power retailers, or one very large player, could default during the crisis because of an increase in costs and nonpayments, the Australian Energy Market Commission says.
As well as the stark warning on the potential blow of the pandemic, the AEMC has also used the 2020 snapshot of competition in Australia's energy sector to raise concerns that price regulation introduced by the Morrison and Andrews governments intended to reduce high power prices is, perversely, encouraging consumers not to shop around. The new report shows that switching rates have fallen by 5% to a three-year low of 19%.
The commission's annual competition review makes a preliminary assessment of the impact of the pandemic on the retail energy market. It notes that residential consumers have faced a combination of higher unemployment and underemployment, lower average incomes and income uncertainty, and have higher energy consumption due to staying home to observe  physical distancing requirements.
The report says in April and May this year energy demand decreased by 17% for small businesses and 11% for large consumers, but increased by 21% for residential consumers. It notes small businesses are also experiencing cashflow problems.
The report notes electricity retailing is a relatively high-volume, low-margin industry, where retailers carry the credit and cashflow risks for the entire electricity sector. "A relatively small increase in the number of non-paying customers could quickly place some retailers in a position where their cashflow is negative – that is, where their revenue falls short of their expenses."
It says the level of stress faced by individual companies will depend on their profitability going in to the crisis, their corporate and financial structure, and their hedging strategy.
But it warns "high-level scenario modelling indicates that the combination of retailers bearing the cashflow risk for the entire supply chain and retailing being a high-volume, low-margin business, means retailers are particularly exposed to increases in late and non-payment by customers".
The commission suggests special assistance for retailers may be required, including rule changes to ease the cashflow burden if conditions deteriorate. "The unprecedented circumstances presented by the Covid-19 pandemic may justify providing assistance to retailers to manage cashflow risks that are exceptions to the usual efficient allocation of cashflow risk within the sector."
The chief executive of the AEMC, Benn Barr, warned the risk of a retailer going out of business was greater due to the extraordinary economic pressure many businesses are facing. "We want to make sure that if this happens in the future, consumers won't be facing higher energy bills through no fault of their own.
"Our plan would ensure the customer's new retailer, called the retailer of last resort, would be prevented from automatically putting their new clients on more costly default offers," he said. "The best-case scenario is to avoid multiple retailer failures altogether because that would take us back a decade, when customers had the options of only a handful of larger players and had much less choice than they have today."
The commission notes that all jurisdictions have measures in place to support households experiencing financial hardship as a result of the pandemic, but it says the coverage isn't uniform. It suggests harmonising these arrangements.
It also noted that more than a million residential and business consumers were more vulnerable because they got their power through private embedded networks in apartments, retirement villages and caravan parks. "These customers aren't protected in the same way as regular small customers when it comes to being disconnected and being able to access concession and ombudsman schemes," Barr said.
On price regulation, the competition review notes that price regulation imposed by governments has achieved its primary objective, which was to reduce high standing offer prices for consumers.
It says consumers are generally happier with their electricity service providers, and new retailers are entering the market, which improves competition, but the regulations appear to have led to decreased switching between retailers, with less consumers chasing the best offers. It also notes the availability of lower-priced offers has decreased, particularly in Victoria.
The commission says it will need a longer period of time to make a definitive assessment about the impact of price regulations on consumer behaviour, with the federal and Victorian regulations only on the books for the past 12 months.