Federal government believes jobseeker rate could be putting people off work
MPs say payment's size has caused some workers to refuse shifts while Coalition plays down suggestions it may permanently lift welfare amount
Australia's coronavirus economic supports could be holding the economy back by providing a disincentive to work, according to Scott Morrison and Coalition backbenchers, who want jobseeker peeled back and new rules on jobkeeper wage subsidies to compel workers to take shifts.
In comments to Guardian Australia, Liberal MPs Warren Entsch and Craig Kelly said the $1,500 fortnightly jobkeeper payment had caused workers to refuse shifts, with Kelly adding that changes to the scheme "are now becoming urgent" and should come ahead of the scheme's current end date of September.
The comments come after the Treasury review of the $70bn economic support program went to the government on Friday. No response is expected until the treasurer hands down the mini-budget in the week of 20 July – prompting Labor to accuse the government of hiding its plans until after the 4 July Eden Monaro byelection.
The government has indicated it will continue to support the hardest hit industries after September but has played down suggestions it is looking to give a permanent $75-a-week increase in the rate of jobseeker unemployment benefits.
On Monday Scott Morrison gave further hints about the future of the payments but warned against "rushed decisions" before Australia enters the "next phase" of economic supports.
Morrison said jobkeeper was costing $10bn a month, which he told reporters in Sydney is "obviously not something you can continue in that form forever".
Payments should be "targeted to the people who get it who need it most" because while some companies were still in a slump, others' revenue would be "getting up above those previous downturn levels", he earlier told 2GB Radio.
Morrison also said businesses were reporting that "some of them are finding it hard to get people to come and take the shifts" because of the government's decision to double jobseeker to $1,100 a fortnight.
"What we have to be worried about now is that we can't allow the jobseeker payment to become an impediment to people going out and doing work, getting extra shifts."
Entsch told Guardian Australia he had "no doubt at all" that industries and regions hardest hit by the Covid recession would receive support after September – and that for some this extension would continue beyond March 2021.
Entsch said that "changes need to be made" because some businesses supported by jobkeeper "say thank you but they don't need it any more", while others in hospitality, restaurants and tourism needed further payments.
Entsch also said businesses had found that some employees "refused to come back" because the $1,500 fortnightly payment – or about $1,300 after tax – made it "not worth coming back to work".
"At the moment, all eligible employees have to be offered jobkeeper – it's one in, all in; there's not compulsion to work even if work is available."
Entsch said it was "short-sighted" of workers to refuse shifts, but called for "some form of compulsion or obligation" to be added to jobkeeper.
On Monday the Australian Bureau of Statistics released data showing that of the Australians receiving jobkeeper, about half (48%) were receiving less income than their usual pay, a third (33%) were receiving about the same and one in five (20%) were receiving more.
Kelly told Guardian Australia it was "a problem" that workers were not taking extra shifts because jobkeeper guaranteed them $1,500 regardless of whether they worked.
"I don't think jobkeeper should be greater than a person's pre-corona wage or salary," he said. "If you were earning $1,000 a fortnight before, you shouldn't be getting $1,500 a fortnight now – you shouldn't be profiting off the Covid disaster."
"If instead of $1,500 you got your ordinary pay of $1,000 and taking extra shifts would take you back to $1,500, you'd take the extra shifts."
The call to trim the payment for casual and part-time workers echoes Labor's position that it was inappropriate to pay workers more in wage subsidies than their ordinary wages.
Webster said there should a "form of mutual obligation" for jobkeeper, arguing that "if taxpayers foot the bill for jobkeeper in good faith … employees need to step up and do their part".
Liberal senator Andrew Bragg said jobkeeper had been a "very successful scheme" but beyond September it should be replaced by "care packages" for industries that the government had impacted with regulations and was therefore "compelled to assist".
"The economy-wide approach had worked well for six months, but from there what's needed might not be wage subsidies – it might be grants, loans or government projects."
Bragg said it was important not to "increase the cost of employment" and that he "wants people to see work" in the bracket of $30,000 to $60,000 a year as "appealing" in comparison with the jobkeeper payment, which equates to about $39,000 a year.
On jobseeker, Entsch said he was "of the view there will be an increase" above the former Newstart rate of $40 a day – but no MPs backed the mooted $75-a-week increase specifically.
Webster said many employers had said they could offer shifts but workers on jobseeker unemployment benefits found at the rate of $1,100 a fortnight they were "comfortable at home and don't want the shifts". This disincentive was "deeply concerning".
"We don't want to make Newstart so positive that people don't want to work."
On Monday, Labor's shadow social services minister, Linda Burney, called on the government to "to end its cruel and confusing political games on jobseeker and reveal its plan for the payment before the Eden-Monaro byelection on Saturday".