Victoria coronavirus hotspots: can you travel to and from suburbs with Covid outbreaks?
Residents of Keilor Downs, Broadmeadows, Maidstone, Albanvale, Sunshine West, Hallam, Brunswick West, Fawkner, Reservoir and Pakenham are being urged not to leave Victoria
The message from New South Wales towards Victorians living in 10 hotspot suburbs affected by small outbreaks of Covid-19 has been clear: don't visit.
"Normally we welcome our Victorian cousins into NSW, but right now I am asking Victorians, particularly those from the hotspots in Melbourne, to not come," the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, said on Thursday. People from his state have also been urged not to travel to Victorian hotspots which include Keilor Downs, Broadmeadows, Maidstone, Albanvale, Sunshine West, Hallam, Brunswick West, Fawkner, Reservoir and Pakenham.
However, unlike physical distancing measures and restrictions on the number of people in venues, and border closures between other states, the advice not to travel between the states has not been embedded in public health laws. Despite this, the NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, has told tourism operators to avoid taking bookings from Victorian travellers from hotspot locations.
The announcements have left many who had booked trips before the recent outbreak confused. How stringent is the advice and what will happen if it isn't followed?
A spokeswoman for the NSW premier told Guardian Australia: "Organisations can do what they want."
"I don't want to go into any legalities, that's not our area," she said.
The spokeswoman said questions should be directed to NSW Fair Trading. She did not respond to questions about what would happen if people from hotspots travelled anyway.
NSW Fair Trading did not respond to questions about whether it is legal for tourism operators to turn people away based on their postcodes, or rights consumers have if this occurs. A spokeswoman said; "While the NSW government has advised against non-essential travel between NSW and Victoria, it has not imposed travel restrictions between the jurisdictions at this time." "That means, if you choose to cancel your travel plans, under most terms and conditions it will be considered a change of mind," she said.
A spokeswoman from Consumer Affairs Victoria said consumers who were unable to fulfil travel and accommodation plans due to the virus may be eligible for a refund, depending on the circumstances.
"Travel and accommodation providers are encouraged to be flexible during Covid-19 and exercise goodwill towards consumers," she said. "Consumers should carefully read the terms and conditions of the travel or accommodation provider, so they know their options if they have to change or cancel a booking. Consumers with travel insurance are encouraged to contact their insurer about any losses that might be covered."
A contract that is impossible to carry out for reasons beyond all parties' control becomes a "frustrated contract" under Victoria's Australian Consumer Law and Fair Trading Act 2012. All businesses providing travel services must abide by the Act, and would be required to refund money paid for services not provided under a frustrated contract, but may deduct reasonable expenses that have been incurred.
Adding to confusion is that, as of Thursday, the Visit NSW website said: "While regional NSW will welcome visitors with open arms, holidaymakers should call their planned accommodation venues, attractions and tourism operators to ensure they will be open and confirm bookings before travelling."
For residents living in Victoria's hotspots, medical experts have advised to avoid interstate holidays to prevent further spread around the rest of Australia. However, Victorians can still travel within the state, including over the school holidays, but the safest way to do so is to stay within household groups.
While travelling, "all Victorians should practice physical distancing and proper hand hygiene", a Victorian government spokesman said. "Even if an area doesn't currently have active cases, the risk is always there in every Victorian community, and we must all stay safe."
There is no onus on tourism operators or other business owners to be enforcing restrictions. "It's up to each individual Victorian to follow the chief health officer's directions and do the right thing," he said.
Interstate travellers are not able to enter Western Australia unless they have been granted an exemption, and those are only being granted in specific circumstances, such as on compassionate grounds, or to people with specific jobs in specialist and skilled areas. On Friday the Northern Territory chief minister, Michael Gunner ,announced travellers from hotspots must stay out.
However, Gunner's comments are much more clear than the NSW premier's, and come with consequences for not abiding to the restrictions. The Northern Territory will push ahead with plans to lift border restrictions from 17 July but quarantine measures will remain in place for anyone travelling from designated coronavirus hotspots. People travelling to the territory will also need to sign a declaration that they have not been through a hotspot in the previous 28 days. Anyone found to have lied on a statutory declaration could face a jail term of up to three years.
Anyone with even mild symptoms of illness, even if they do not live in hotspot locations, should get tested and avoid travel until they have been cleared of the virus.
"Our message is clear – if you're sick, don't travel, stay home, and if you have even the mildest symptoms, get tested," a Victorian government spokesman said.