Australian drugmakers hit by critical shortages at height of pandemic, inquiry hears
Evidence given to parliamentary committee sparks new calls to develop national capability to manufacture medicines and key supplies
Australian companies were "shocked" to experience price-gouging and had trouble accessing critical supplies to make medicines and personal protective equipment at the height of the pandemic, a parliamentary committee has been told.
It has prompted fresh calls for Australia to build up its ability to manufacture critical drugs "without reliance on opaque and fragile offshore supply chains".
Dr David Sparling, the chief executive officer of IDT Australia, a pharmaceutical manufacturer, recalled being part of a government-backed working group that was contacting suppliers around the world in a search for certain active pharmaceutical ingredients.
"We were making calls to Europe late at night, making calls to our American colleagues in the morning, dealing with the subcontinent and China at the middle of the day, pretty much working around the clock," he told federal parliament's joint standing committee on foreign affairs, defence and trade.
"After a week of effort we still hadn't secured any of that material and the Covid-19 numbers in Australia had tripled in that particular week. That's what still resonates with us here about having some robustness in those supply chains, so that we can potentially avoid those situations happening again."
Sparling said that while the group eventually secured some access, "it did highlight the fragility of the supply chain".
He said he would "never forget" a call he had with a potential supplier and was "still shocked to this day". According to his evidence, a sales representative of the unnamed company said she knew how much of the product the company had in stock but did not know what the price would be.
"And I said to her, 'You realise that people are looking for this medicine around the world and there are people dying of coronavirus while we're trying to access these medicines and I'm not quite sure why you can't give me a price for this medicine; are you looking to profit from this disaster?' Her simple answer was, 'Yes'.
"So I think that taught me a very valuable lesson about how certain individuals were reacting through this crisis and particularly in regards to some of the more mercenary aspects of the supply chain."
Les Lewis, project leader and general manager of Detmold Medical Group, which pivoted to manufacturing masks to respond to the crisis, told the same committee that his company also had difficulties securing raw materials. He found that "there was a bidding war in the market place".
"Materials which would normally be, say, $4.50 per kilo pre-Covid were selling for $100 per kilo during the Covid period," Lewis said.
"There was a lot of price gouging, a lot of bidding, because every country was trying to secure their raw materials supply.
"There were some quite difficult times where we purchased material based on a test report and based on a significantly inflated price. Then once that material arrived in Australia and we were able to get some testing done, in some cases we found that the material was substandard."
Detmold Medical Group told the committee it currently had two major contracts - one with the federal government to supply 100m masks, and one with the South Australian government for 45m masks – but discussions with some other states were underway.
Detmold's chief executive officer, Alfonzo Ianniello, was asked about the hurdles the company faced in pivoting to these new operations. He said that in the initial period, international border closures had also disrupted access to raw materials. Then procurement was affected by price increases.
One of Australia's challenges in securing access to critical supplies from overseas, Ianniello said, was that given the low volumes, the country was at risk of being "overtaken in a production queue" by bigger trading markets.
Alison Verhoeven, the chief executive of the Australian Healthcare and Hospitals Association, said the pandemic had led to significant disruptions to global supply chains, including in medicines and personal protective equipment.
In Australia, she said, the pandemic followed the summer bushfire disaster, causing a "perfect storm for demand".
Verhoeven also raised concerns about the arrival of a number of faulty goods in Australia. She urged the government to support the capacity of domestic manufacturers to quickly pivot capabilities if demand occurs.
The witnesses were the first to give evidence to the joint standing committee's inquiry into the impact of Covid-19 on Australia's foreign affairs, defence and trade.