'How do we recover?': Australian arts sector fears rescue package won't be enough to survive
Producers glad for boost but artists and smaller companies face struggle to compete for cash
The announcement of a new $250m package designed to jumpstart a flatlining arts and entertainment sector has been received with guarded enthusiasm.
The support package – announced by the federal arts minister, Paul Fletcher, and scheduled to roll out over 12 months – consists of a $75m competitive grant program through the Restart Investment to Sustain and Expand (Rise) fund, a $50m fund targeted at the film and television production industry, administered by Screen Australia, and $90m in government-backed concessional "Show Starter" loans with which arts and entertainment businesses can revive stalled projects or create new work.
Another $35m will provide direct financial support for commonwealth-funded arts and culture organisations facing existential threats to their viability.
"The devil is in the detail," said Sue Donnelly, the executive director of Sydney's Belvoir theatre. At this point the company was "hanging on" with its staff on the jobkeeper program and donations from the theatre's patrons.
"When we are able to reopen, there are huge practical challenges for us – it won't be the same as it was pre Covid-19," Donnelly said.
Even with financial help from state governments, a federal year-long stimulus program is unlikely to be enough to save arts companies from hitting the wall.
A major issue facing the sector lies in the state government-mandated regulations on social distancing. No production is viable when it can sell only a fraction of its house, and with the spike in Covid-19 cases in Melbourne in recent days, those regulations are likely to be in force long-term.
The worst-case scenario for performing arts venues is that distancing will continue until there is a vaccine – and that may be more than a year away.
"The federal funding is great but it's much more important that we open the theatres again," said Michael Cassel, producer of the Melbourne production of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child. "Just as airlines have found a way to fly without distancing, we need to find a way forward."
Harry Potter was only viable with a full house of 1,500 people, said Cassel, who was still hopeful of reopening the show in September. "It does not make financial sense to run at anything less."
Arts leaders say the amount of support on offer falls $100m short of the $345m the industry peak body, Live Performance Australia, estimated was needed for survival.
"It is a huge gap," said Lee Lewis, artistic director of Queensland Theatre. "This is a time when countries around the world are asking: how much do we value our arts and culture, do we want it to survive? In our country, the government has only just acknowledged we exist."
Lewis said performing arts companies would have to compete for the $35m allocated to them. Queensland Theatre needed $1.5m just to get back on its feet. "That is just to survive – that doesn't include getting new shows on. What will the Australian Ballet ask for? What will Opera Australia ask for? This money doesn't go a long way."
Almost half of the overall funding, which includes stadium-size events down to small local festivals, is pitched at new work instead of recovery. "It is focused on jobs but we still need to recover," Lewis said. "How do we recover?"
Lewis anticipates the government could receive around $400m to $450m worth of applications from producers and arts businesses all competing for a pot of $75m to produce new shows. "Whoever sits on the panel to make decisions around who gets the money will be deciding the cultural future of Australia and what we present to the world."
The hardest hit in the sector are the small to medium-sized, independently funded companies, which will be forced to compete for funding without the clout and grant-getting resources of their larger cousins.
"We're eagerly awaiting further information on the specifics of the package with particular focus on eligibility and process," said Kerri Glasscock, artistic director of the Sydney Fringe festival and the Old 505 Theatre in Newtown, Sydney.
"Over the past five months our independent artists and venues have been decimated, with the majority of unfunded arts businesses ineligible for support and arts workers slipping through the welfare cracks.
"With the information provided currently, this package appears to be heavily geared to supporting the commercial part of the sector, and companies already receiving government funding. We are very concerned that the small businesses and independent artists will again be left out in the cold, with no access to support."
The viability of the small to medium independent sector was vital to the health of the performing arts economy, Glasscock said.
"There is a chain of supply that exists and it is vitally important in feeding the major companies, our international exports and award-winning companies. The through line from youth theatre to drama school, to independent theatre, to main stage or professional film and television, is clear and well-trodden.
"Without one we do not have the other and excluding a vital part of the sector at this time of need through reduced eligibility scope would be devastating. You simply can't fund the restaurant without feeding the farmer."