New $4.3m education website announced by Dan Tehan duplicates existing service
Fears 'one-stop shop for microcredentials' could become 'multimillion-dollar white elephant'
There are fears a $4.3m government website to showcase short university courses will become "a multimillion-dollar white elephant", as education department workers acknowledge that another government website already offers the service.
Concern about the website – which the education minister, Dan Tehan, said would be a "one-stop shop for microcredentials" when announcing it this week – comes after the government website Course Seeker was updated this year specifically for those searching for the shorter online courses, including a prominent banner on its home page.
When announcing the launch of Course Seeker in 2018, Tehan also called it a "one-stop shop" for students, noting it was the result of a 2016 review into higher education that recommended having a single website for students to compare university offerings.
Originally oriented towards undergraduates but since expanded to include shorter courses for graduates and workers, the site gained attention last year when it emerged that the education department paid $48,785 to a market research company to help it decide on its name.
The government's commitment to spend $4.3m on the new short course website comes after it announced the cost to study humanities and other degrees would rise substantially amid an overall reduction in commonwealth support to universities, while up to 21,000 university job losses are feared as a result of a drop-off in international student revenue owing to Covid-19.
While modellers have forecast that the loss of international students could mean a loss of between $10bn and $19bn to Australia's university sector income between 2020 and 2023, Guardian Australia understands that several universities lose money by offering the shorter courses, and are doing so out of a civic responsibility to retrain newly unemployed Australians.
On Monday Tehan and the employment minister, Michaelia Cash, said the "marketplace for online microcredentials" would build on the success of the subsidised, six-month online courses the government announced as part of its higher education relief package in April, in part as an attempt to retrain out-of-work Australians stuck at home during Covid-19.
Tehan noted that since the package's announcement, 54 tertiary education providers have created 344 short online courses.
In a statement announcing the new website, the government describes microcredentials as shorter six-month online courses designed to offer training in areas of skills shortages, to make Australians more employable or to complement education from a conventional degree.
"The microcredential marketplace will be a platform for jobseekers to see what skills they can gain by further study to help them get a new job or to get ahead in their current job," Tehan said on Monday.
When the Guardian asked Tehan how the proposed marketplace would differ from Course Seeker, he said: "Course Seeker aims to help students make informed decisions about future study, while the microcredential marketplace will allow for a broader use by students, workers and employers."
He did not address why the $4.3m could not be spent adding the extra information on microcredentials into the existing website.
When Guardian Australia called the Department of Education, Skills and Employment's inquiry line, the operator said the Course Seeker website "already offered" prospective students the ability to search just for short courses.
He said the Course Seeker website had been updated after the government announced a higher education relief package in April to subsidise six-month courses.
"After they announced it it only took them about a week to set it up to be able to just search for shorter courses," he said.
He said Course Seeker provided information about which short courses could give students credits for further degrees.
The opposition education spokeswoman, Tanya Plibersek, said the $4.3m announcement came as "Scott Morrison is trying to make it harder and more expensive to go to university", referring to last week's university policy overhaul.
"There hasn't been an IT project the Liberals couldn't stuff up, so it wouldn't surprise me if this was a multimillion-dollar white elephant," Plibersek said of the proposed microcredentials marketplace.
"When will the government do something serious to help young Australians get the education they deserve?" she said.
A Universities Australia spokesman said: "Anything which helps to provide people with qualification and skills for the economic recovery is a good thing."