Australian arts and culture to get $250m rescue package from Morrison government
Boost to include $50m for screen productions and $75m for festivals, concerts and other events as social distancing restrictions ease
The Morrison government will unveil a $250m support package for Australia's arts and cultural sectors, including $90m in government-backed concessional loans to fund new productions that will create jobs during the economic recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic.
Scott Morrison will also use Friday's national cabinet meeting to try to reach agreement with the premiers on a timetable for reopening theatres and local productions in an attempt to provide some certainty to a sector hit for six during the crisis.
The local industry has been devastated economically because of social distancing restrictions that have shut down film and television productions, theatres and touring shows.
Prior to Thursday's announcement, the emergency relief for the arts from Canberra has consisted of a $27m package, announced in April, directed to regional organisations, Indigenous organisations and music industry outreach outfit Support Act, and the Australia Council's repurposing of $5m in existing funding for small, quick-release grants.
Thursday's package includes a $75m grant program that will provide capital to help Australian production and events businesses put on new festivals, concerts, tours and other events as social distancing restrictions ease. Grants will range from $75,000 to $2m.
Screen Australia will administer a $50m fund to help finance local productions that have shut down to comply with public health measures. In addition to the social distancing requirements, many productions had to fold because they could not secure insurance.
The government will also provide $35m to what it describes as "significant commonwealth-funded arts and culture organisations" – which could include theatres, dance companies or musical groups. The Australia Council will help allocate the funding.
The package also includes $90m in concessional loans to help bankroll new productions and events that provide employment and generate revenue. The loans will be provided by the banks but underwritten by the commonwealth.
Morrison also intends to create a taskforce to oversee the implementation of the support package.
Australia's live performance industry says the pandemic has triggered an unprecedented crisis, with a catastrophic impact on jobs, but the rescue package has been slow in coming. A meeting of arts ministers in late May ended in a stalemate after Canberra blocked a push from the states to broaden the jobkeeper wage subsidy to boost the struggling sector.
The states have funded support packages of various sizes, with Victoria having committed more than $51m across the sector and the New South Wales government pledging $50m for a "rescue and restart" package.
Under pressure from Labor and the Greens to do more, the government has said people employed in the cultural sector have been given access to income support during the pandemic. It says $100m in wage subsidies and cashflow support was provided to the sector during April and May.
Australian Bureau of Statistics data suggests 645,303 people are employed in Australia's arts and cultural sectors.
The expenditure review committee of cabinet considered the $250m package last Thursday night after talks between Morrison and representatives from the entertainment sector. Morrison and the arts minister, Paul Fletcher, met by teleconference with the heads of entertainment industry associations, including the Australian Recording Industry Association, touring companies, the chief executive of the Australian Chamber Orchestra and artists Mark Vincent and Guy Sebastian.
Ahead of Thursday's announcement, Fletcher said: "We are backing over 600,000 Australians in the cultural and creative sectors whose work contributes $112bn to our economy.
"These sectors have been hit hard during the pandemic, and the government's investment will play an important role in the nation's economic recovery."