Victorians travellers in limbo after NSW advises businesses not to accept people from Covid-19 hotspots
Some NSW businesses cancel reservations ahead of school holidays as airlines wait for legal directives before refusing service
Melbourne travellers have been left in limbo ahead of the school holidays after the New South Wales premier advised businesses not to accept customers from any of the six Victorian hotspots.
"I would encourage businesses not to welcome anybody from those hot spots because the advice from the Victorian premier is do not travel interstate if you're from one of those hot spots," Gladys Berejiklian said on Tuesday.
"And my advice is even stronger: it's do not go down there and certainly, I think it's the prerogative of every business, of every organisation, not to accept anybody from those hotspots at this time. That is basic pandemic management."
While airlines and some industry groups appear to be waiting for legal directives before refusing service to impacted Melburnians, other businesses have begun cancelling reservations or asking people not to come. This confusion has left the nearly one in five Victorians who live in these areas unsure if they can or should travel.
Sharni O'Raffertey, who lives in the affected local government area of Brimbank, said she was meant to be going to NSW the second week of school holidays.
"I have until the 27 June for free hotel cancellation, but I'm not sure what to do," she said.
"I'm hoping for a miracle within two weeks … It's very frustrating, my kids are devastated they can't visit their grandparents but it can't be helped."
Some businesses have taken the premier's advice even further, calling everyone booking from Victoria and recommending they cancel or postpone.
"We'll just reach out to them independently and tap them on the shoulder, and just say look we understand you've got an upcoming booking, we're happily going to allow you to cancel or postpone that for no penalty. So we're going to encourage them to do the right thing but we can't force them," said Michael Skinner, the general manager of Elements of Byron.
He said it was too difficult to only restrict travellers from the affected suburbs.
"There's a tremendous number of postcodes that fall into those governmental areas. We're from NSW, when you say 'the Hume' I don't have a clue where 'the Hume' is. We are just reaching out to anyone with a Victorian postcode. It's a great big bucket and unfortunately, but you can't drill down and say, 'We understand you're coming from such and such a suburb,' that's just impossible," he said.
Skinner said they had postponed bookings from third-party sites as they did not require guests to list what area they were travelling from.
While Berejiklian was clear in her advice, she has not made it a legal mandate. Many industry groups including Museums and Galleries of NSW, say they won't advise their members to turn away customer unless this recommendation becomes more official.
Despite Melbourne's airport being located in the hotspot area of Hume, airlines have increased their business between the two states in recent days. Virgin Australia has doubled its flights from once to twice daily.
"It's not our job as an airline to regulate who can and can't travel," said a spokeswoman for Virgin Australia.
"That's the government's job, so we comply with state and federal government regulation and we facilitate any measure that they are enforcing. Our job as an airline carrier is to operate flights where it is legal to do so and there is demand to do so."
The shunning of hotspot residents isn't exclusive to NSW. A caravan park chain managed by the Great Ocean Road Coast Committee in Victoria has cancelled all bookings from guests living in the outbreak areas.
The decision affects those with holidays planned at the Anglesea Family Caravan Park, the Torquay Foreshore Caravan Park or the Lorne Foreshore Caravan Park.
"This will apply to all bookings up until Monday 13 July and include 12-month permit holders," the caravan parks said on its websites.
"We will not be lifting these restrictions until the Victorian government advises that community transmission in these areas is under control."
The parks said they made the call to protect the health and safety of staff and visitors and will be contacting guests with cancelled bookings in the coming days.
The six affected local government areas are Brimbank, Hume, Moreland and Darebin in Melbourne's north and west, and Casey and Cardina in the city's south-east.
On Sunday the national Australian Health Protection Principal Committee also advised against travel to and from these areas.
Additional reporting by Australian Associated Press