Victoria's coronavirus spike: is this a second wave, and what's causing the clusters?
The state took swift action to contain Covid-19 but it is the site of 83% of Australia's new cases. We examine why
While Victoria took swift action to contain the spread of Covid-19, the state is experiencing a concerning increase in virus cases. This is despite restrictions such as school closures and limits on the numbers of people in venues continuing longer than most other jurisdictions.
In the past week, 116 of Australia's new cases – 83% of them – were reported in Victoria. It has also placed pressure on testing in some of the most affected council areas including Hume, Brimbank, Moreland, Darebin, Cardinia and Casey. Almost one in five Victorians live across these areas. For almost one week, new cases in double digits have been reported in the state, with the department of health on Monday announcing 16 new cases overnight.
According to Australia's chief medical officer, Prof Brendan Murphy, "There is no definite definition of that."
"If this outbreak escalated and we had several hundred cases, that would be the sort of situation where I would be extremely concerned," he told reporters on Monday.
"But there is no official definition of a second wave, it's a concept where the outbreak is such that you don't think the public health measures can easily control it in the short term. At the moment, I have great confidence in the Victorian response, they are responding very effectively and we need to watch things over the next few days to see how it happens."
Of the 16 new cases announced in Victoria on Monday, six are linked to known outbreaks, four were detected in hotel quarantine, five were detected through routine testing, and one case is still under investigation. Despite concerns that Black Lives Matter protests in recent weeks would trigger a rise in cases, none of the cases in the past week have been acquired at a rally.
Staff from the the Stamford Plaza hotel in Melbourne city and the Rydges on Swanston hotel in Carlton have acquired the virus, and both hotels are being used to quarantine returned travellers.
But the two clusters of most concern to the state occurred within families. One family lives in the suburb of Keilor Downs, a part of the Brimbank local government area, while the other family affected lives in Coburg, within the Moreland local council area. Those two family clusters accounted for 25 cases across four government areas as of Monday.
Allen Cheng, professor of infectious diseases epidemiology at Monash University, said there were more than a dozen people living in the same household in one of those family clusters. "In some communities multi-generational households aren't uncommon," he said. "I think what these cases indicate is that we must ensure vulnerable populations, those that speak and read limited English, and others who may have difficulty understanding public health messages, are being communicated with."
Victoria's health minister, Jenny Mikakos, said spread also occurred when extended family members came together, visiting each other across different households and spreading the virus. "The risk there is that the family members can transmit that virus to workplaces, to school settings, and other locations," she said. She urged people to isolate if unwell or waiting for tests results, and reiterated that if Victorians can work from home, they must.
Cheng said that new cases partly came down to being unlucky.
"Chance plays a large part in what happens," he said. "About 80% of transmission can occur from 20% of people. Lots of people don't transmit the virus at all. It is probably just luck. What is critical is how quickly those people are identified and how quickly their contacts can be traced."
That's why test shortages in some areas is a concern. However, there is still plenty of supply in other local government areas. While people living in hotspots haven't been told to stop all travel outside their suburb yet, they have been asked to limit it, and some plans to ease restrictions across the state have been delayed. A spokeswoman with Victoria's health department said even if there were shortages at some clinics, people should not have to travel too far to find a place with tests. There are 100 testing sites operational across Victoria.
"However, we are aware that some sites – particularly drive-throughs – are experiencing extremely high demand," she said.
In response to the increased numbers, a pop-up drive-through clinic has been established in Keilor Downs, and the opening hours of the Deer Park drive-through site have been extended to include weekends. A pop-up drive-through has also been established in Dandenong and roving testing squads will be on the ground this week.
Testing is now widespread throughout the country, so it is unlikely Victoria's increase in cases could be explained by more testing, Cheng said. He said while the increase was worrying, community transmission was still low overall. But people must remain vigilant with social distancing and hygiene, he said.
Murphy agreed. "I think there is a lot of luck in this," he said.
"Both Victoria and New South Wales had by far the largest number of initial cases from return travellers and both New South Wales and Victoria have been our concerns in terms of community transmission. Community transmission has been present in both of those states.
"New South Wales has, very fortunately, been in a much stronger position in recent weeks. It is not really possible to say why they have managed to bring community transmission under better control than Victoria, there could be a lot of reasons for that. The geography, where the outbreaks are [could be factors], but I think the most important thing is that both states have really good public health responses."