Victoria to extend state of emergency for four more weeks after spike in Covid-19 cases
Queensland declares southern state a 'hotspot' while South Australia reconsiders decision to reopen its border
The Victorian government has announced it will extend its state of emergency for at least four more weeks and ramp up its police enforcement of lockdown rules after a spike in Covid-19 cases.
The surge has also prompted neighbouring South Australia to reconsider its decision to reopen its border, while Queensland has declared all of greater Melbourne a Covid-19 hotspot.
Deputy chief medical officer Nick Coatsworth says there would be some increases in cases and that restrictions would need to continue until a vaccine for the virus is found.
But he said what was happening in Victoria shouldn't stop other states from going ahead with their plans to ease their own restrictions, because the virus situation was different in each jurisdiction.
On Sunday the Victoria's health minister, Jenny Mikakos, announced the state had recorded 19 new cases of the virus, including 10 cases believed to be a result of community transmission. It brings the total number of active Covid-19 cases in the state to 121, the highest in two months.
Mikakos told reporters the spike, which had seen 77 cases in the four days prior to Sunday, had prompted the state government to expand its state of emergency until at least 20 July and increase the level of police enforcement in specific Covid-19 "hotspots" throughout Victoria.
She said one of Sunday's new cases was linked to a family in Keilor Downs, taking the number of cases in the cluster to 11 spread across nine households.
"It is still a very serious situation," Mikakos said on Sunday.
"We have had particularly some concerns around family gatherings, extended family members across many households, visiting each other even when they have been exhibiting mild symptoms."
Mikakos also confirmed that a grade three student from St Mary's primary school in Hampton had returned a positive test. The student attended the school while infectious, and she said the school would be closed while contact tracing continued.
The spike in cases has prompted South Australia to reconsider its decision to reopen its border with Victoria. SA had been due to reopen the border, shut at the height of the pandemic, on 20 July, but its government has not ruled out staying closed."We will not open our borders to Victoria unless it is safe to do so," health minister Stephen Wade said on Saturday. "Our number one priority is the health of South Australians."On Sunday Queensland also declared all of Melbourne's 31 local government areas Covid-19 hotspots, meaning anyone who travels to the city must self-quarantine for 14 days if they return to Queensland.Queensland's chief health officer, Jeannette Young, said the hotspots included all 31 local government areas in greater Melbourne, as well as bordering areas of Murrindindi, Mitchell, Moorabool, Macedon Ranges and Greater Geelong.
Dr Coatsworth said Australia will continue to get outbreaks and clusters.
"Importantly as well, for those states where restrictions are lifting, that doesn't imply a lifting of our personal behaviour standards that we have become so used to."
That included people maintaining social distancing, excellent hand hygiene, and staying away from others and getting tested if they have symptoms.
"All those elements have been exceptionally successful in controlling Covid-19 in Australia thus far and there is no reason to expect that will be any different into the future."
He said there were only three confirmed cases so far from people who had attended the Black Lives Matter protest two weeks ago, but there was no evidence they had infected anyone else.
The outbreak in Victoria will also see the state ramp up its already significant police enforcement of Covid-19 lockdown rules. Victorian police minister, Lisa Neville, said police would "strengthen that enforcement once again".
"The key focus, the strengthening of enforcement, will be firstly in those hotspot areas as they are now, and potentially in the future. They will also be focused around the school holidays and the ski season," she said.
On Sunday the state's chief health officer, Brendon Sutton, confirmed members of the Essendon AFL club would have to self-isolate after one player, Conor McKenna, tested positive for Covid-19.
But Sutton said he wasn't sure whether that would mean the team would have to withdraw from matches for the next fortnight.
"If that individual has trained with such a number that they won't be able to play, then that's how they will have to proceed, but if they can manage with the existing player list, minus those close contacts, then they will proceed," Sutton said.
"I think they are still working up the close contact list."
The new spike in Covid-19 cases cases in Victoria meant people must once again cancel social plans and struggling businesses must wait.
From midnight on Sunday to July 12, Victorians will only be able to have five people at their homes and gatherings outside the home will be restricted to 10.
Cafes, restaurants and pubs were set to expand their number of patrons from 20 to 50 on Monday, but this is now on hold – a blow to ailing businesses desperate for recovery. Gyms, cinemas, indoor sports centres and concert venues will be allowed to reopen for the first time but with a 20-person limit.