Up to 350 international students to return to Australia under pilot scheme
Post-coronavirus plan will help determine 'how to do this safely', ACT universities say
The federal and Australian Capital Territory governments have approved a plan for up to 350 international students to fly to Canberra to resume their studies – the first arrivals since Australia closed its borders to non-citizens and non-residents in March to prevent the spread of Covid-19.
The students will take a charter flight in July to resume studies at the Australian National University and the University of Canberra, the first universities to take up national cabinet's plan to allow international students under pre-approved pilot programs.
The ANU has 3,000 international students who were unable to re-enter Australia before the border ban came into force on 20 March, while the number for UC is 400.
Under the ACT pilot, up to 350 students who have previously studied in Canberra will fly into the national capital and undergo the required two weeks of compulsory quarantine in hotels, under a cost-sharing arrangement between the universities and the ACT government.
The universities will give preference to older students, such as those enrolled in research or postgraduate courses, honours students and those in the final year of their undergraduate degree. No departure airport has yet been nominated under the plan.
The ANU's vice-chancellor, Brian Schmidt, told Guardian Australia the pilot was the first "baby step" to help determine "how to do this safely and at scale".
"We're doing this for benefit of our students, who need to get back on campus so they can finish their degree," he said. "We're not going to make any money out of the pilot – it's all for our students.
"Canberra has thousands of hotel rooms and we have a big staff … We will try to ramp this up at a time and at a scale where we can do so safely."
The UC's vice-chancellor, Paddy Nixon, said the pilot in semester two would "allow us and Australia the time to develop the right processes and protocols to ensure the safety of those students coming to our campuses" before aiming to restart international student recruitment in semester one of 2021.
"We're very keen to get our students back and give them a safe and secure environment to learn," he said.
Asked about proposed reforms such as visas allowing international students to start studies online overseas and come to Australia in future, Schmidt said the federal government had been highly responsive on a case-by-case basis but the university sector was "still waiting for a comprehensive policy position" to give international students greater certainty.
Nixon said the international student market would be "a contested space", citing the former UK minister Jo Johnson's call to give students four-year post-study work visas.
Australia-wide, some 80% of international students were able to make it to Australia in time for first semester. Universities have recorded a massive drop-off in international enrolments for second semester.
With a reduction in international student revenue and the exclusion of public universities from the jobkeeper wage subsidy scheme, the sector believes it will lose up to $16bn by 2023 and 21,000 jobs owing to the impact of Covid-19.
In addition to international students, Australia is looking to open a travel bubble with safe countries, such as New Zealand, and welcome back business travellers.
On Wednesday, the trade and tourism minister, Simon Birmingham, told the National Press Club the government would "progressively and carefully step through what we can do to reopen".
Birmingham said he hoped the pilots programs for international students would pave the way for travellers intending longer stays, including work travellers, to return to Australia.
But he suggested travel would be dependent on if "you can extend those same sort of safeguards to them and their stay" – suggesting that quarantine requirements will persist.
"I do, sadly, think that in terms of open tourist-related travel in or out of Australia, that remains quite some distance off, just because of practicalities of the volumes involved, and the need for us to keep health first," he said.