Morrison says Australia risks 'losing its humanity' after woman denied permission to attend father's funeral
The prime minister criticised Queensland's 'mystifying' decision which meant Canberra woman Sarah Caisip missed her father's Brisbane service
Scott Morrison has doubled down on his attack against the Queensland government for refusing to allow a young woman to attend her father's funeral, declaring Australia is in danger of losing its humanity during the pandemic.
Sarah Caisip, a 26-year-old from Canberra, was denied permission to attend the Brisbane funeral of her father, Bernard, who died from cancer last week, but was escorted by authorities to a private viewing after the service.
Queensland's chief health officer, Dr Jeannette Young, told reporters permission to attend the service had been denied because funerals were very risky environments for the spread of coronavirus and the state had taken a deliberately risk-averse position.
Morrison resumed his attack against Queensland on Sky News on Thursday night, saying the premier and health officials needed to use more discretion in their decision-making.
"Today just hurt," the Liber leader said. "We have got to find a better way to deal with the heart here."
The prime minister – who has been locked in a pitched battle with the premiers for weeks over border closures – said he was "mystified" by Queensland's decision. Asked whether Australia was in danger of "losing our humanity", Morrison replied: "The way these decisions are being made, we are in danger of that."
He said during the pandemic "I don't want us to lose any more than we have to".
Early on Thursday, Morrison called the Sydney radio host Ray Hadley to ratchet up political pressure on the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, who later accused the prime minister of trying to bully her into allowing Caisip to attend her father's funeral.
An emotional Morrison said he had contacted Palaszczuk in an effort to persuade her to make an exemption to Queensland's border controls and allow the young woman, who was in hotel quarantine in Brisbane, to farewell her father on Thursday afternoon.
Palaszczuk told parliament she had taken a call from the PM on Thursday morning and told him she would pass the information on to the state's chief health adviser. But a visibly irritated Palaszczuk declared she had no intention of being "bullied" or "intimidated" by Morrison.
The premier said a pandemic was a time to be working collaboratively "and this politics of division is disgusting and disgraceful."
The Queensland government later confirmed the young woman would be permitted to attend a private viewing of her father to say farewell after the funeral. Caisip would be conveyed to the private viewing under escort, a government spokeswoman confirmed.
Young told reporters "the last thing I would want to happen, is to have an outbreak at a funeral, and by definition, there are always older people attending funerals".
Asked why Canberra was still considered a hotspot given there had been no active cases in the territory for 60 days, Young said the ACT was "in the middle of New South Wales".
She pointed to a cluster of cases in Bateman's Bay more than a month ago and said "a lot of Canberra have weekend residences they go to in Batemans Bay".
"Unfortunately, for people who live in Canberra, they are deemed as being in a hotspot and need to be managed as such," Young said.
The chief health officer also told reporters she had allowed sporting administrators and people in the entertainment industry to enter the state with more favourable quarantine rules "because that is bringing a lot of money into this state and, can I say, we need every single dollar in our state."
Morrison, whose father died earlier this year, said Thursday's dispute wasn't "about the premier of Queensland and me or anyone else" but, he argued, surely an exception could be made to allow a young woman to attend her father's funeral.
The prime minister said he had not sought to make the case public. Morrison said it had been an awful year and his objective was to provide "hope to a family who just desperately needs the whole country to put their arms around them today".
Caisip told her story on Hadley's radio station earlier on Thursday. The woman works in Canberra and had relocated to Queensland hotel quarantine to try and see her father before he died last Wednesday but that attempt failed.
The Queensland government has declared the ACT a Covid-19 hotspot. But Canberra has not had a new case of the virus in two months.
Hadley put the case first to the home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, on Thursday morning. Dutton blasted the state government for applying the border control regime inconsistently.
"You've got exemptions for sporting people and business people etc, who don't have to do the quarantine, or do the quarantine in a less onerous way – the inconsistency of the approach and the way they are applying these rules to some people and not others just goes against our grain," Dutton said. He declared decisions were being made by "faceless bureaucrats".
Thursday's row has become emblematic of tensions within the commonwealth about the public health restrictions imposed by the states. The brawl has been continuing unresolved for several weeks.
Morrison has been attempting to persuade premiers to end border restrictions in favour of localised lockdowns in the event of a Covid-19 outbreak. Western Australia has refused to sign up to Morrison's plan to reopen state borders by Christmas while Queensland has expressed reservations.
Queenslanders go to the polls in a state election in October.