Revealed: more than 40% of Victorian coronavirus aged-care deaths were residents in just 10 homes
Exclusive: Federal health department refuses to confirm figures as doctor condemns 'outrageous' secrecy around the data
More than four out of every 10 Victorian aged-care deaths due to Covid-19 occurred across just 10 facilities, data obtained by Guardian Australia reveals.
As of Monday, 532 of the state's deaths were linked to aged care, with St Basil's Home for the Aged in Fawkner recording 44 of those deaths. The home, which caters for the Greek Orthodox community, is where the most deaths have occurred.
A writ filed to the Victorian supreme court in August alleges St Basil's breached its duty of care and failed its residents during the pandemic.
Epping Gardens Aged Care had the second-highest number of aged-care deaths in the state, at 35. Kalyna Care, a residential home in Delahey, was third, recording 22 deaths.
Guardian Australia revealed in August that a 95-year-old woman at Kalyna was found by nurses with ants crawling from a wound on her leg and the bandages around it crusted with blood, after Covid-19 infected the home. She died of conditions unrelated to coronavirus after being transferred to hospital.
Twin Parks Aged Care in Reservoir and Kirkbrae Presbyterian Homes in Kilsyth both recorded 20 deaths, and Baptcare Werribee and Mecwacare Hoppers Crossing both recorded 18 deaths. Meanwhile, four facilities each recorded 17 deaths: Glendale Aged Care in Werribee, Estia Health Ardeer, Japara Sunbury and Bupa Edithvale.
In total, 228 deaths occurred across the 10 homes, with the figures current as of 10am Monday.
Menarock Rosehill, in Highett, was 12th, recording 16 deaths. On Monday, Guardian Australia revealed that the daughter of two of the home's residents, Sybil and John Beardon, is pushing for a coronial inquest into their deaths.
The federal Department of Health, which is responsible for aged care, did not confirm the figures, but the Victorian Department of Health confirmed late on Monday that the data was correct. Guardian Australia confirmed with four of the homes that the death figures were accurate: Japara, Kirkbrae, BaptCare and Bupa. A spokeswoman for Estia said it was up to the federal government to confirm the number of deaths. The other providers did not respond.
Guardian Australia has repeatedly asked the federal health minister, Richard Colbeck, to provide the data.
Dr Sarah Russell, a public health researcher examining aged care, also obtained the data seen by Guardian Australia and said it was "outrageous" that it was so secretive.
"This whole sad, sorry tragedy has been a cluster-fuck from the very beginning, when there was no real plan for aged care," Russell said. "Why should people fear for their jobs if they reveal this data, and why should residents of these homes be fearful of speaking up?
"If 44 people died in any other sector, if they died in a childcare centre, wouldn't the public know about it?
"These are big numbers. These are a lot of people who died who did not need to die. They died in horrible circumstances and we must not forget them. These people were vulnerable.
"Why are we protecting the privacy of the providers over the public's right to know?"