Victoria's hotel quarantine allowed guests out to attend funerals and visit sick relatives
Health department officer says guests were allowed out for medical reasons, and on compassionate grounds to visit sick relatives and go to funerals
Victoria's hotel quarantine guests were rarely supervised when given permission to attend funerals or visit terminally ill relatives, an inquiry has been told.
At a judicial inquiry hearing on Friday, a senior health department officer was quizzed about the reasons return travellers were allowed to leave quarantine during their 14-day compulsory detention.
The officer, Noel Cleaves, said that aside from medical reasons and emergencies, there was also a "broader category" for compassionate grounds that allowed people to visit terminally ill relatives or attend funerals.
Under questioning by counsel assisting, Rachel Ellyard, Cleaves said there were times when these guests were supervised by hotel quarantine staff but "they were relatively rare".
"Generally they happened at the start of the hotel program," he said. "But there were some isolated examples throughout the program where an authorised officer did attend with the detainee to a particular setting.
"But predominantly the person was issued with the temporary leave permission, they were advised about the terms of that permission and they were advised about penalties that would apply if they did not comply."
Guests were given PPE and told to wear it, Cleaves added.
He said that in some cases staff called funeral homes to confirm the reasons for a person's temporary leave, while in other cases hospitals declined to allow hotel quarantine guests to visit.
A nurse working in the program has previously told the inquiry she was aware of one person given several hours on consecutive days to visit a relative. She did not believe staff had checked to see where the person actually went.
The inquiry, chaired by former judge Jennifer Coate, is investigating failures in the hotel quarantine program that have been blamed for Victoria's second wave.
On Friday afternoon, a senior police officer said it would have been an "inefficient use of resources" if the force had a 24/7 presence at hotel sites.
The inquiry has previously heard a senior public servant from the Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions was rebuffed when she pushed for police to be on site at all times.
Victoria police commander Tim Tully confirmed that the use of private security companies rather than police was the preference of the former chief commissioner, Graham Ashton, who retired in June.
But he told the hearing on Friday he was not aware of a request for police to maintain a 24-7 presence on site.
And in his capacity leading a hotel quarantine taskforce, Tully would have been told if such a request was made, the inquiry heard.
"I'm not aware of any request of a 24/7 policing presence at any of the hotel facilities as part of this program," he said.
Tully later added that in his view "it was certainly not required" and "would be an insufficient use of resources".
The inquiry has heard it was police who pushed for the use of private security guards, now a focus of the judicial inquiry.
In the end, police helped guards respond to incidents and helped facilitate the arrival of guests to the hotels.
Police officers are stationed in NSW's hotel quarantine program, working alongside private security guards.
Tully also revealed he had been concerned after receiving photos of guests outside exercising while being escorted by security.
But he said it was not the police's role to supervise the work of private security companies.
The inquiry continues.