Melbourne and regional Victoria to have different roadmaps out of lockdown
Daniel Andrews reports 70 new cases, the lowest daily increase in more than two months, and five more deaths
The Victorian premier has confirmed there will be different roadmaps out of lockdown for Melbourne and the state's regional communities, while the New South Wales premier says she "deeply regrets" border residents feeling blindsided by snap border closures.
Victoria recorded just 70 new cases on Tuesday, the lowest daily increase the state has seen in more than two months. The premier, Daniel Andrews, also confirmed there were now only 139 active cases in regional Victoria, which was placed under stage three restrictions four weeks ago.
Due to the low case number outside Melbourne, Andrews said the state would pursue a split approach to easing social distancing laws.
"On Sunday, we'll speak about two roadmaps towards opening up, one for metropolitan Melbourne and a second roadmap that may have different component parts for regional Victoria," he said.
The roadmap set to be announced on Father's Day will outline a rough timeline of Victoria's easing of Covid-19 restrictions.
Case numbers have dropped considerably in the state's three largest regional cities, which were previous areas of concern.
Geelong now has 50 cases, with two new cases today. Bendigo has only eight active cases and Ballarat has just five.
Five deaths were also added to the state's toll, but Andrews confirmed only three had died in the last 24 hours. The others were historical cases added as the state and federal government reconcile their criteria for a Covid-19 death.
The NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, also addressed regional communities on Tuesday, apologising to border residents adversely affected by the hastily changed rules around the state's southern border with Victoria.
"Absolutely I regret the way in which the community didn't feel they had sufficient notice. In fact, sometimes the health advice evolves extremely quickly," she said during her press conference in Albury.
"I'm the leader and the buck stops with me and I want people to appreciate that every decision we take is in the interests of our citizens."
Berejiklian announced that, effective 4 September, the "border bubble" would revert back to 50km on either side of the border, allowing more freedom of movement for residents of towns that straddle the state line such as Albury and Wodonga.
Permits for travel will still be required and residents can only cross the river to obtain necessary goods or services, for care or compassionate reasons, and to attend work or school.
Previously, residents with permits were only allowed to travel 2.5km into Victoria without being required to isolate for 14 days. The new bubble will include other large Victorian towns such as Beechworth and Wangaratta.
"As the Victorian numbers continue to decline, that gives us greater confidence to ease restrictions and to listen to the concerns raised by border communities," she said.
Berejiklian laid some of the blame for previous snap border closures on Victoria, suggesting it was difficult to obtain the required information.
"I don't make this as a criticism, but I just want people to appreciate where we're coming from as it has been difficult for us to get information on the other side of the border about rates of testing, community transmission and that has, in part, led to our angst about how we can move forward," she said.
"We know that if we have any suspected cases or contact tracing or testing, we're able to jump onto it straightaway. We don't have that level of confidence on the other side, only because we're not in charge of the system."
NSW recorded 13 new cases of Covid-19 on Tuesday. Two were returned travellers in hotel quarantine and 11 were acquired in NSW and linked to known cases and clusters.
The Reddam Early Learning Centre cluster in Lindfield has grown to three, with two additional staff members contracting the virus. Another case was linked to the Tattersalls City gym.
The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, has confirmed state borders will remain closed for at least a month after a Covid-19-positive Victorian was taken into custody after attempting to fly into the state.
The man was intercepted by police at the airport after arriving on his 9.19am flight and could be charged after further investigation.
"This is great work from the police that have been able to apprehend this man, who was trying to get into Queensland illegally," Palaszczuk said.
"This goes to show how strong our border measures are and the fact that they are working."
Contact tracing would be conducted on passengers on the flight and some may need to self-quarantine.
Queensland recorded another two cases on Tuesday, one an 18-year-old student at Staines Memorial College at Redbank Plains and the other a 37-year-old male nurse who worked at Ipswich hospital.
The Victorian government has secured the support of three crossbenchers to extend its current state of emergency by six months.
The Andrews government originally sought a 12-month extension to its state of emergency powers to allow for the enforcement of public health orders, but faced a backlash resulting in a reduced six-month extension.
The current declaration expires on 13 September, the same day stage four lockdowns are set to end in Melbourne.
The health minister, Jenny Mikakos, said there "has never been a more important bill before the Victorian parliament".