A physician who loved thanksgiving, a tenderhearted nurse
We are documenting the lives of every US medical worker who dies helping patients during the pandemic. These are just a few of hundreds of cases
Lost on the frontline is a collaboration between the Guardian and Kaiser Health News that aims to document the lives of healthcare workers in the US who die from Covid-19, and to understand why so many are falling victim to the pandemic.
Each week, we're documenting new cases of healthcare workers who have died on the frontlines of the coronavirus pandemic. Here are their stories:
Occupation: Registered nursePlace of work: Kaiser Permanente Fresno medical center in Fresno, CaliforniaDate of death: 25 May 2020
Sandra Oldfield had a big heart and couldn't say no to anyone, her sister Lori Rodriguez said. She had no children of her own but loved to spoil and care for her nieces and nephews.
She was a good listener and advocate for others who could raise concerns for management without losing her composure, Rodriguez said.
In mid-March, as she cared for critically ill patients in the telemetry unit, she was upset that she was given only a surgical mask – not nearly as protective as an N95 respirator – to treat patients as Covid-19 was spreading.
Her concern was on point: she cared for a patient who later tested positive for the virus.
"I feel if she had an N95, she would be here today," Rodriguez said. "I don't want to see anyone else lose their life like my sister did."
Kaiser Fresno said it has followed state and federal guidelines on protective gear. (Kaiser Health News is not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente.)
Rodriguez said her sister resisted going to the hospital as her symptoms worsened, reluctant to expose paramedics or hospital staffers to the virus. When Oldfield agreed that an ambulance should be called, she wanted the paramedics to be advised to take every precaution.
– Christina Jewett
Occupation: Internal medicine physicianPlace of work: Hsu &amp; Loy medical group in Margate, FloridaDate of death: 24 March 2020
Alex Hsu loved Thanksgiving.
Sitting down with his family for the holiday feast, Hsu always spoke for at least 10 minutes about how grateful he was to be in America. Hsu "didn't really come from much", said Zach Hsu, his son.
Hsu fled communist China, first immigrating to Hong Kong and then to Hawaii, where he attended medical school. He eventually landed in Broward county, Florida, where he practiced for decades.
As one of the few Chinese-speaking internal medicine doctors in the area, Hsu would see "a crazy amount of patients, and he never complained about it", Zach said. As Hsu aged, he turned to Buddhism and meditation and wrote loving notes to his children as they left for college.
It is not clear how Hsu contracted Covid-19. He had traveled to New York weeks before falling ill but also was seeing patients who could have been carrying the virus.
Hsu worked in a private practice with privileges at Northwest medical center. His staff did not return requests for comment. Hsu died at the same hospital where he had cared for patients.
– Sarah Jane Tribble
Occupation: Registered nursePlace of work: Clara Maass medical center in Belleville, New JerseyDate of death: 15 April 2020
Barbara Birchenough consistently mailed cards to her family and friends, for birthdays, holidays or just as a pleasant surprise. Her youngest son, Matthew Birchenough, said it reflected her personality: quiet, thoughtful and kind.
Birchenough began training as a nurse right after high school and worked for 46 years. She planned to retire on 4 April, with a big party to follow.
On 24 March, she came home from work and told Matthew that four floors of the hospital had been taken over with Covid-19 patients.
The next day, she began to cough. In text messages with her oldest daughter, she conveyed that protective gear was lacking at the hospital. "The ICU nurses were making gowns out of garbage bags," Barbara texted. "Dad is going to pick up large garbage bags for me just in case."
The next time Birchenough went to the hospital, it was as a patient. Her eldest daughter, Kristin Carbone, said she tested positive for Covid-19 shortly before she died.
A Clara Maass spokesperson said the hospital has been compliant with state and CDC guidelines for protective gear.
– CJ
Occupation: Registered nursePlace of work: McLaren Flint hospital in Flint, MichiganDate of death: 4 April 2020
Patrick Cain was always "close to his patients", said Teresa Ciesielski, a nurse and former colleague. Cain, whom Ciesielski described as a proud Canadian, met his wife, Kate, in 1994, when they both worked in Texas. They had a son.
"He was an amazing father," Ciesiekski said. "He was always talking about his kid."
Cain's ICU work meant caring for patients awaiting Covid-19 test results. Some days, he worked outside the room where patients with Covid-19 symptoms patients were seen. The hospital hadn't provided protective gear, despite his requests, according to Kelly Indish, the president of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees Local 875, his union.
On 26 March, he texted Indish. He was worried he had been exposed to the virus the week before, and he hadn't had a mask. "McLaren screwed us," he wrote.
A hospital spokesperson said employees received appropriate gear based on government guidelines. But those rules didn't mandate N95s – known to block viruses – for workers who, like Cain, were providing care but weren't performing aerosolizing treatments, which can release virus particles into the air.
Cain developed a fever, loss of appetite, dry cough, nausea; soon after he became the hospital's first employee known to die of Covid-19.
– Shefali Luthra