'I don't deserve to die in here': women in an Ohio prison fear Covid-19 will kill them
Those inside describe choosing between food and medicine, a lack of hygiene products, and an inability to socially distance
In this moment of uprising, pandemic, and nationwide calls to defund the police, it is imperative to remember the totality of the carceral system, and to listen to those incarcerated inside. At the Ohio Reformatory for Women (ORW), flooded, cramped living quarters, a lack of soap, and a campaign of misinformation are exacerbating the effects of Covid-19. The situation at this Ohio prison, like so many others, is dire; at least 13 people have already died at Marion Correctional Institution, and Marion and Pickaway Correctional Institutions combined account for approximately 2,500 cases of coronavirus.
At ORW, where we, as members of an abolitionist group in Columbus, Ohio, have been communicating with a number of incarcerated people – we've seen conditions worsen in real time: early in the week of 18 May, those at ORW were alerted that a confirmed case had been found inside. Over the next several days, we received letters with increasing numbers: another case, then another, then six. Now, one month since the first confirmed case, people incarcerated at the facility have received notice that a staff member has tested positive. The facility remains on "level red" – the "highest level of security", according to a warden.
Throughout the pandemic, we've read letters detailing the frightening, unsafe environment people have been forced to endure at ORW. Temperatures are not being taken, hygiene products are either outrageously expensive or non-existent, and the bathrooms are missing soap. Some of the women are housed in quarters filled with mud and infested with birds, others in flooding, "treacherous" tents with no wifi or way to call home.
The steps taken to protect ORW's population have been minimal. Inside, beds are packed in tightly, and a source writes: "The staff has been observed without masks walking through the dorms [...] We are sleeping less than three feet from one another, we eat four to a table without masks, there is just no possible way to obtain complete social distancing without removing every other bunk bed in our dorms, and with overpopulation as it is, I don't see that ever being a possibility."
Women at ORW have seen their meals slashed from three to only two per day. They've been denied basic necessities, like toilet paper and cold medicine. Their only option is to buy these necessities at inflated prices at the commissary, which, a correspondent explains, "means you choose between food and hygiene or medicine. Nobody should ever be forced to make that choice. Just because we are incarcerated doesn't mean our health doesn't matter."
"Let's face it," says one letter, "prisons and jails are not made for social distancing. They are made to pack people in like sardines, make you as uncomfortable as they can, and get as much money as possible."
Governor Mike DeWine claims that prison and jail populations are falling – but intake numbers in Franklin county show this to be untrue. A contact at ORW describes a daily influx, writing: "The other day 4-6 sheriff vans were outside reception bringing in new inmates, [and] every van is [from] a different county around Ohio!"
"The same beds they empty today, they refill tomorrow," says a woman. "There are close to 3,000 women here." Of those new admits she writes: "They may be screened, but they're not being tested ... and whether or not they are, doesn't matter ... They're intermixed with new arrivals everyday. It's constant contact with new inmates from all over Ohio."
When women held at ORW request medical assistance, they are often denied or flat-out ignored. In one letter, a contact details overhearing a correctional officer mocking a woman experiencing Covid-like symptoms. "This happens a lot," she says. "We don't get adequate medical attention ... and when we do ask for it, unless we fall out on the floor ... we don't get it in a timely manner."
"Truly," says one woman, "the state has done nothing to protect us except give us masks. There is no way to truly socially distance. The state of Ohio needs to be releasing inmates and fast. We need room. Judges need to do their part. My fate is in the prison's hands and to me that's just scary."
There are no church meetings, classes, or groups being offered, and incarcerated people have seen their already limited contact with the outside world further restricted. "We get 15-minute video visits which is hardly enough time and some people's loved ones may not have the access to do that ... This whole experience is emotionally, mentally and even physically exhausting."
Adding to the risk is the constant shuffling of people across different parts of the prison. One source writes: "Once one inmate is moved out, another is moved in place. Just yesterday we had six inmates from reception move into this unit."
"They need to deal with the problem of social distancing now," says one source, "not next fall or we will have another Pickaway or Marion incident and this time it could be worse. I'm a recovering drug addict that has been placed here for risking my life using illegal drugs but the state of Ohio believes it is alright for them to risk my life."
As officials largely refuse to act, a sense of hopelessness has overtaken the facility. "They still don't test anyone that I've seen, anyway. What does it really matter anymore? We have all been together on this compound, in and out of the chow hall, touching, breathing all in the same areas. I don't know Mia. Just pray."
The solution is clear: Ohio must begin mass releases from its prisons and jails. The state has already shown itself incompetent at protecting the people it imprisons. The only way to mitigate the harm is to free people, now. "I would feel so much safer," says one contact, "if they would let more people out so I have a better chance of not getting Covid-19."
"I didn't kill anyone and I don't deserve to die in here," says one letter. "Many of us feel like sitting ducks."