'New York always comes back': workers return as city enters phase two of reopening
Phase provides economic lifeline to many as New Yorkers can dine out, shops can open for browsing and salons can take clients
New York City has inched closer to restoring its reputation as a thriving, hectic metropolis, as the second phase of reopening begins in the city which experienced the deadliest coronavirus outbreak in the US.
From Monday, for the first time in three months, New Yorkers will be able to dine out, though only at outdoor tables. Shops will be open for browsing, with rules about capacity and masks. Barbers and hair salons can take customers and offices are allowed to bring back staff. Schools are closed, but playgrounds are open.
There will be four reopening phases, but the mayor, Bill de Blasio, saw Monday's moves as "the single biggest piece of our economy", particularly for a restaurant industry he called "quintessential to New York City".
The city estimates 150,000 to 300,000 additional workers will return to their jobs Monday, two weeks after reopening began with construction, curbside-pickup retail, wholesaling and manufacturing.
The city's Covid-19 death toll has been in single digits in recent days. But New York is still reeling from an outbreak tied to more than 22,000 deaths and it remains to be seen how far people will be willing to go.
Many have no choice. For thousands of New Yorkers, the city never actually shut down. Essential workers rung up groceries, delivered hot meals and worked at overwhelmed hospitals.
Phase two will provide an economic lifeline for some desperate to return to work, such as the 725,000 undocumented migrants who have been unable to claim financial relief from government programs meant to ease the economic burden of the pandemic.
The crisis has underlined inequalities, with black and brown communities experiencing higher death rates than the white population. Economic effects have also hit these communities the hardest, leaving many to decide whether to risk access to health insurance and income, or their personal health, on Monday.
Infections are down in New York City, but between 200 and 400 people have still been testing positive for the virus each day over the past two weeks, according to city data.
At landmark department stores, safety measures will be in place such as giving workers temperature checks and putting plastic dividers at cash registers. Saks Fifth Avenue plans to reopen on Wednesday with 100 new hand-sanitizer stations and escalator handrails outfitted with ultraviolet-light disinfection, among other changes.
Shuttered offices can reopen Monday, with various new rules. Some of the city's biggest employers are sticking with largely remote work for now.
Many office workers have been told to work from home through the summer, if not into next year. Twitter, which has hundreds of employees in Manhattan, told its staff in May they could work remotely forever.
Those returning include Larry Silverstein, the 89-year-old World Trade Center developer, who will work there with up to a third of Silverstein Properties' staff. The firm is staggering schedules so employees can keep their distance and they will have to wear masks in the 7 World Trade Center lobby. Footprints mark where to stand in elevators now limited to about a quarter of usual capacity.
"I went through 9/11. I remember people telling me we were never going to be able to get people to come back to lower Manhattan," said Silverstein, who leased the twin towers six weeks before the 2001 terror attacks destroyed them.
"Never bet against New York, because New York always comes back, bigger and better than ever before."