Andy Murray shares concern after Covid-19 positive tests at Djokovic event
Andy Murray wants to play in the rescheduled US Open at the end of August, but he shares the concern spreading rapidly through tennis since Grigor Dimitrov, Borna Coric and two trainers tested positive for coronavirus in Croatia at the weekend.
Murray drew back from outright criticism of his long-time rival and friend, Novak Djokovic, after the world No 1 was forced to abandon his troubled Adria tournament moments before the final in Zadar on Sunday because of the shock withdrawal of the world No 19 Dimitrov. But Murray could yet decide not to fly to New York if there are further outbreaks of Covid-19 – or complacency among other players.
Having seen clips of players partying in a Belgrade nightclub last weekend, and more mingling in Zadar, Murray said he wonders how the US Tennis Association will police player movement at Flushing Meadows, where players will have to keep to themselves and resist the bright lights of New York.
"In a bubble – if that's what people are doing – what's the punishment for people who are not sticking to the rules there that have been put in place?" Murray said.
"You imagine a situation where you're in the last stages of the US Open but, because someone's gone out [of] that bubble and broken those rules and gone into Manhattan or done something he shouldn't have been doing, and you then contract the virus and are not able to compete in, you know, the quarter-finals and semis of the US Open. It would be extremely frustrating. So how do they police that exactly? I don't know how they go about it."
When news broke on Monday that the world No 33 Coric, Dimitrov's coach Chris Groh and Djokovic's fitness coach Marko Paniki had also tested positive, while Djokovic had returned to Belgrade without having a test or making a formal statement, concern among many players and fans switched to anger.
On Monday Serbian reports said Viktor Troicki, Djokovic's closest friend in the game, had become the fifth person from the Adria Tour to test positive.
Dan Evans – speaking in London before the Battle of the Brits, which starts on Tuesday at the National Tennis Centre in Roehampton – slated Djokovic, who is chairman of the ATP players' council. The British No 1 said: "I don't think you should be having a players' party and dancing all over each other and then two very good players test positive. He should feel some responsibility for his event and how it has transpired.
"It is a poor example to set, even if the guidelines in that country are not two metres. It is not a joke is it? There has been a total disregard for that. It is very unfortunate that Grigor has it, Coric has it. But, if you strip it back, is it a surprise? That is the question we should all ask. I hope there is no second-guessing now on the US Open because of [these] unfortunate events."
Murray acknowledged the virus had eased in Serbia and Croatia but pointed out tennis is a global activity. "Once you start to bring international travel into it, with players and team members from all different parts of the world coming in, you need to make sure you're taking all the correct measures, safety measures, all the precautions that you can, to try avoid a situation like they got into over there."
Murray is keen to resume at the highest level, having not played since the Davis Cup finals in November. "The grand slams will be my priority. The proposals that the USTA have made, I don't know if all of them are set in stone. They seemed to have changed quite a bit over the last couple of weeks.
"I don't mind what the situation is, providing it's safe. If I was told I could take one person with me, for example, you can make that work. I would probably go with a physio in that situation, with some coaching done remotely. That's not a perfect situation, obviously. From a performance perspective, that's tricky. But I also appreciate that these are unprecedented times, so you have to make do with what's possible. That sort of thing wouldn't bother me much. For me it's more about safety."