Deloitte cuts 700 jobs in Australia as coronavirus takes its toll on professional services
Law firms, accountants and consultants face redundancies as PwC and KPMG also cut hundreds of staff
A second wave of job losses, this time among professionals, is hitting the Australian economy as professional services firms, law firms, advertising agencies and universities adjust to the squeeze on their revenues due to the Covid-induced downturn.
Deloitte, one of the big four professional services firms, announced on Monday that it would shed 700 professional staff from its 10,000-strong Australian workforce.
While revenue has grown for the financial year by 10%, the firm had experienced a significant decline in its revenue base across Q4 as a result of Covid-19 impacts, including a decline of 19% year on year in May 2020, chief executive, Richard Deutsch said in a release to staff.
In particular the consulting division, which provides advice to business and government on business processes, mergers and compliance has been seen a sharp downturn in future work.
"From the beginning of the Covid-19 crisis two of our important principles have been to preserve as many jobs as possible while also protecting the long-term sustainability of the firm," Deutsche said.
In April the firm announced a short-term reduction in annualised pay of 8% for the majority of staff.
"Unfortunately, the last quarter of our 2020 financial year has seen a substantial drop in revenue and operating profit. We expect this trend to extend into at least the first quarter of our new financial year," he said.
PwC announced last week that it would cut 400 staff from its 8,000 strong workforce, mainly from the consultancy and financial advisory division.
KPMG cut 200 staff in April and in May staff opted for a 20% pay cut for working the same hours for four months as the firm began planning a phased return to work.
Comment has been sought from EY about its plans.
The law firms have been tightlipped over their strategies to meet a downturn in legal work. Ashurst has cut partner draws by 20% for six months and staff took pay cuts until July, with a similar cut in hours.
Other firms have cut partner draws by up to 50% and furloughed workers. But whether legal work will pick up in the second half of 2020, remains to be seen.
The advertising industry was hit early but is bracing for worse to come as clients review marketing budgets for the next financial year.
Forrester, a US forecasting firm said earlier this month US agencies might be looking at a loss of more than  50,000 jobs by the end of 2021. An estimated 250,000 people were employed by ad agencies as of the end of 2019, according to IBISWorld.
Outside of the US, job losses are expected to match those losses at around 50,000, but it is difficult to get figures for how the downsizing will impact Australia.
Many firms both locally and overseas have been furloughing staff and instituting pay cuts.
Forrester estimates US media spending to decline by 23% over the next two years.
The Interactive Advertising Bureau which reports on the digital advertising industry in Australia found in April that 21% of respondents indicated they have paused all their ad spend, 57% have decreased some of their spend and 15% have either increased or maintained their spend.
In total Australian companies spent $15.8bn on advertising in 2018.
The advertising and media landscape appears to have permanently altered as readers and viewers switch permanently to digital news and streaming services.
Total time spent on online news sites is returning to normal levels after a huge uplift recorded in March 2020 during the Covid-19 lockdown but is still up nearly 20% on pre-lockdown figures.
Meanwhile there have been more than 150 newsroom closures around the country, and layoffs at the major media groups including Seven and News Corp. The ABC announced 250 jobs will go to accommodate a $41m budget shortfall as a result of Coalition budget cuts announced in previous budgets.
The full extent of job losses in academia is still to manifest.
The university sector is currently in negotiations with its workforce, on a campus-by-campus basis. The National Tertiary Education Union estimates that  more than 20,000 jobs could be lost as institutions address budget shortfalls due to the decline in international students.