An amiable mason, a theater-loving nurse: the US healthcare workers who died from Covid-19
We are documenting the lives of every US medical worker who dies helping patients during the pandemic. These are just a few of hundreds of cases
Lost on the frontline is a collaboration between the Guardian and Kaiser Health News that aims to document the lives of healthcare workers in the US who die from Covid-19, and to understand why so many are falling victim to the pandemic.
Each week, we're documenting new cases of healthcare workers who have died on the frontlines of the coronavirus pandemic. Here are their stories:
Occupation: Certified medication aidePlace of work: Cedar Ridge Inn in Farmington, New MexicoDate of death: 16 May 2020
Barbara Bedonie was happily raising three children when she realized she wanted to do more. She enrolled to become a certified nursing assistant, which turned out to be a calling.
"She was truly happy working," her daughter Charmayne Bedonie said. "I've been hearing so many stories from families she's helped."
For 17 years, Barbara worked at a nursing home and received awards for perfect attendance. Management admired her work ethic enough to pay for her to become a certified medication aide. She was Navajo and could speak to residents in their Indigenous tongue.
"I know she helped a lot of people just by speaking the language," Charmayne said.
The home reported a number of Covid-19 cases. Bedonie tested negative for the virus repeatedly, but overwhelmed by fatigue, she knew something was wrong. She was hospitalized and finally a test confirmed she had the coronavirus, Charmayne said.
Charmayne expressed praise for the hospital and the nursing home. Her employer did not respond to questions about protective gear and said only, "Cedar Ridge Inn misses our beloved colleague very much."
Charmayne said families have been sharing stories about her mother. "They say she was a beautiful soul, inside and out," she said.
— Maureen O'Hagan
Occupation: Travel nursePlace of work: NewYork-Presbyterian Brooklyn Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn, New York, via TrustaffDate of death: 7 May 2020
Amanda Marr Gilliam was on a cigarette break when Denny Gilliam threw that first glance. "Those blue eyes caught me," she said. "The very next day, we started dating."
Gilliam treasured family time, like movie nights, when the kids would pile into their king-size bed with chips and French onion dip.
A "country boy at heart," Gilliam loved the outdoors, Amanda said. He took the family hunting for ginseng, digging for frogs and camping throughout the Appalachian mountains near their home in Pelham, Tennessee. He and Amanda liked to fish in Lake Chickamauga for crappie and bluegill.
Gilliam was a committed nurse – it was his second career, after serving in the military. In April, when he learned New York hospitals were short-staffed, he felt obliged to serve once again.
In early May, when Amanda didn't hear from him for "what felt like eternity," she called 35 hotels near the hospital before finding where he'd checked in. A private investigator confirmed: he had died days earlier of Covid-19.
"My worst fear came true," Amanda said.
— Eli Cahan
Occupation: Registered nursePlace of work: Wellpath at Hudson county correctional facility in New JerseyDate of death: 5 April 2020
Edwin Montanano went to the US Open every year. He loved Broadway shows, especially Miss Saigon, but also Les Misérables, Phantom of the Opera and Cats. He liked candy – Symphony bars and M&amp;Ms. And he and his wife, Annabella, relished in hosting visitors.
"My parents always had an open-door policy, and [growing up] it was always a very busy house," said Michelle Helminski, his daughter. "When relatives or friends would come to visit, my dad would take them to New York – he was an expert tour guide."
In more recent years, his four young grandchildren became a focal point in his life.
Edwin, who studied nursing in his native Philippines, worked at St Michael's medical center in New Jersey for 30 years alongside Annabella; Michelle and her brother, Matthew, were even born at the hospital. After retiring, Edwin returned to work as a nurse at a nearby prison.
Helminski said she does not know whether he contracted the virus at work, but as of May, at least three other workers at the prison had died of Covid-19. A representative from Wellpath, the company that employed Edwin, wrote: "Our clinical personnel have ongoing access to masks, gowns, and other PPE, as well as the training to use it effectively."
Edwin developed Covid-19 symptoms in late March and died at St Michael's.
– Danielle Renwick
Occupation: MasonPlace of work: Lenox Hill hospital in New York CityDate of death: 22 April 2020
Decades ago, two girls asked Gianmarco Bertolotti to the senior prom. Even as a teenager, he was "such a sweet soul", said Monique, his sister. Instead of rejecting either one, he skipped prom.
As a child visiting grandparents in Rapallo, Italy, Gianmarco would invariably return from town with "focaccia, espresso and stories of the friends he'd made". As an adult, he had "a special way about him", Monique said, "forg[ing] a lasting bond with everyone he met".
An avid traveler, he'd visited New Orleans and Japan in recent years. "He explored life without restrictions," Monique said.
A mason, Gianmarco took the subway from his home in Queens every morning to help repair the hospital's ceilings, floors, soap dispensers and sharps collectors. But on 13 April, he called his sister because he was coughing up blood after carrying a case of seltzer up three flights of stairs.
The next morning, he went to the emergency room. A week later, he was dead.
"Protecting our employees … has been our priority from day one," the hospital said in a statement.
– Eli Cahan