Fatigued Californians are back in lockdown. Will it work?
The effort to rein in a surging pandemic comes as the public seems less willing or unable to comply with shelter-in-place rules
California has enacted new stay-at-home guidelines as coronavirus cases in the state have surged, placing 33 million pandemic-fatigued residents under some of the harshest restrictions in the US in a last-resort effort to rein in the pandemic.
The measures are the strictest since those enacted in March, when California's early, aggressive lockdown helped keep the state's death rate relatively low. Nine months on, however, a worn-out public seems less willing to comply with shelter-in-place and many workers – devastated by the economic toll of the pandemic – are unable to do so.
Here's what you need to know about California's lockdown:
It's bad. In Los Angeles, hospitals are expected to overflow by Christmas. In southern California, only 12.5% of ICU beds remain available. In the San Joaquin Valley, just 8.6% of ICU beds are open.
"We're seeing the healthcare system become overwhelmed right now," said Marta Induni, the director of research at the Oakland-based non-profit Public Health Institute.
Having tallied more than 1.3m cases, the state broke a record on Friday with more than 25,000 in a single day. "This isn't just an escalation of the pandemic," Induni said. "We're seeing an exponential increase – and when there's just so much of the virus around, the risk of infection everywhere is higher."
Activities that were considered low- or medium-risk this summer – such as outdoor recreation and dining – are now much riskier, because a larger proportion of people in any context could be carrying the disease.
"That leaves us with only one possible solution – asking everyone to stay at home, shelter in place," Induni said.
California's new shelter-in-place order is designed to be implemented regionally when a region's intensive care unit capacity falls below 15%. The restrictions have already been triggered in southern California and the San Joaquin Valley. In the Bay Area, where ICU capacity is at 21%, local leaders in five counties decided to pre-emptively enact lockdown for 6 million residents.
The order, which will remain in place until 4 January, requires people in affected regions to stay home and minimize contact with those outside their household. Outdoor dining, playgrounds, campgrounds and other recreation areas are closed. "My message couldn't be simpler: it's time to hunker down," Los Angeles's Mayor Eric Garcetti said last week.
But the rules aren't so simple – they come with many exceptions and caveats. Non-essential retail, including malls and shopping centers, will remain open at reduced capacity. Outdoor religious services and protests are permitted, and entertainment production and professional sports can continue without a live audience.
In Europe, a second set of lockdowns this autumn seems to be slowing infection rates. California's approach could help the state reset, with blunt measures helping to convey just how serious this latest wave of infection is. With ICU beds filling up with Covid-19 patients, it's the only option in regions that simply have no hospital capacity to treat more sick patients.
The lockdown could also be an opportunity to "start over", Induni said, and allow officials to devise better plans and messaging around mask mandates and provide social support for essential workers who cannot stay home.
But compliance will be key, and nine months into the pandemic, Californians are less likely to adhere to a strict lockdown. Despite changing rules and restrictions, the share of Californians who have met with people outside their household has remained steady for months, at around 35 to 45%, per surveys conducted by the University of Southern California.
In addition, the measures have triggered backlash from some who believe the rules are too restrictive and others who believe they are too permissive. Parents have asked why it's no longer OK for their children to visit playgrounds, while malls remain open. The owners of restaurants and small businesses – which have invested in building up outdoor dining areas equipped with space heaters for the winter – argue that the new restrictions will be devastating.
The contradictions within the new rules have sown distrust, said Monica Gandhi, an infectious disease specialist at UC San Francisco. "There's true, true pandemic fatigue – and it's not because the public is selfish, it's that there's a true desire to be with other people. And that's part of being human."
The new restrictions are also a blow to vulnerable Californians who cannot afford to stay at home. Unlike Europe, California lacks a wide social safety net for those who get sick or lose work due to lockdown restrictions, reducing the incentive and ability for Californians to comply with stay-at-home orders, self-quarantine measures and other pandemic restrictions when faced with financial instability.
Better messaging from public health officials would be a start, Gandhi said.
Officials had failed to clearly justify their priorities and explain why a socially distanced, marked outdoor walk with a friend was banned but indoor retail shopping was fine, she said. "People are meeting despite the risks because they are understandably sad and lonely," Gandhi said, noting that lockdown measures were particularly tough around the holidays.
Gandhi, who heads the HIV, infectious diseases, and global medicine unit at UCSF/ San Francisco general hospital, said public health officials would do well to learn from the Aids crisis in developing safety measures that reduce harm.
Officials might consider asking people to stop eating and drinking with people outside their household, but allowing them to take walks with friends, or gather for limited periods of time outdoors, at a 6ft distance while wearing face masks. During the peak of the HIV epidemic, "telling people to just stay away from each other, otherwise they're selfish, just didn't work," Gandhi said. "A nuanced approach that didn't treat people like they couldn't understand more complicated rules was what started to turn the tide."
With the "rainbow of hope that vaccines are coming", health officials should also signal that an end is in sight, "and let Californians know exactly what they're planning to do to support workers and businesses in the meantime", she said. "We need to understand and acknowledge people's lived experiences in devising policies."