Dozens test positive for Covid after swingers convention in New Orleans
Forty one people test positive after 'Naughty in N'awlins' event which saw about 250 people congregate in mid-November
Forty-one people have tested positive for coronavirus after attending a swingers convention in New Orleans, in what officials have called a "super-spreader event".
The gathering, called "Naughty in N'awlins" saw about 250 people congregate in the city in mid-November. It went ahead despite cases rising in Louisiana at the time.
One of the infected swingers was hospitalized in a serious condition, according to the event's organizer, Bob Hannaford, who addressed the outbreak in a blogpost.
"If I could go back in time, I would not produce this event again," Hannaford wrote.
"I wouldn't do it again if I knew then what I know now. It weighs on me and it will continue to weigh on me until everyone is 100% better."
NOLA.com reported that the Naughty in N'awlins event was much smaller than in previous years. About 2,000 people attended in 2019, and roughly 250 made the trip this year.
In his blogpost Hannaford said social distancing was enforced at the swingers convention, and contact diaries were kept.
He said attendees were tested for coronavirus before arriving, and 50% already had antibodies.
Hannaford attributed the outbreak to complacency as the multi-day event drew to a close.
"When we contacted the people that were positive, we asked them several questions to find more potential positive cases and try to find out where the biggest risks took place," Hannaford said.
"In almost every case, they admitted to us that they were super diligent on the first two days (Wed and Thurs) and then they relaxed a little on Friday and then they said 'Fuck it, it's our last day' and many admitted that their lax effort on that final day is probably why they ended up positive."
Swingers were given color-coded wristbands based on whether they had antibodies or did not, and Hannaford said other measures were also taken.
"We did not install a dancefloor, because the city protocols say 'No Dancing'," he said.
"But you see, I saw Footloose, so I knew that you couldn't really outlaw dancing.
"But seriously, there never was a packed dancefloor like most of our events.
"People bounced and moved by their tables, and even though people were more spread out, I saw a lot more eye contact and positive acknowledgment of short flirts and teases."