Morrison says support measures are only temporary 'medication' for sick economy
In National Press Club speech, PM outlines 'jobmaker' plan and says microeconomic reform in industrial relations and skills needed to spur growth
Scott Morrison warns that government support measures are only a temporary form of "medication" for a sick economy and microeconomic reforms in skills development and industrial relations will be needed to spur growth.
In an address to the National Press Club on Tuesday, Morrison will announce a push to add conditions to $1.5bn in federal funding given to the states for skills and outline a cooperative process with unions and business to identify productivity-boosting changes to industrial relations.
The industrial relations minister, Christian Porter, has already set the scene by stating controversial union penalty legislation is on pause as the government now seeks union support to improve productivity without stoking a fierce WorkChoices-style backlash.
In excerpts of the speech, seen by Guardian Australia, Morrison puts households and businesses expecting further taxpayer support and the states – who he accuses of dropping investment in skills – on notice.
Morrison says Australia faces "arguably the most challenging environment this country has ever faced, outside of wartime" with unemployment set to top 10%, trade down one third and foreign direct investment to drop by up to 40%.
"But we should remember that these difficult times are not the product of economic failure, but a global health pandemic," he says. "The problem was not the economy."
After the revelation the jobkeeper wage subsidy will cost $60bn less than forecast, Morrison says that government economic supports are now expected to cost $150bn over six months.
In an ominous sign for the future of the $1,500 fortnightly jobkeeper wage subsidy and $550 coronavirus supplement on unemployment benefits, Morrison warns that demand stimulus can boost the economy "in the short term".
"And that is why we have supported this as an emergency response," he says.
"But it can only be temporary. At some point you've got to get your economy out of ICU.
"You've got to get it off the medication before it becomes too accustomed to it. We must enable our businesses to earn our way out of this crisis."
In the speech, Morrison argues the government can assist businesses by providing affordable energy, markets to connect to, infrastructure; and changes to skills policy, the amount of regulation and "the amount and the efficiency of the taxes they must pay, in particular whether such taxes encourage them to invest and employ".
Morrison outlines principles for the government's so-called "jobmaker" plan, including that Australia will be an "open and sovereign trading economy", "care for country", "build on our strengths", create opportunity and reward effort.
Despite signals the government wants greater sovereign manufacturing capability, Morrison says this will be achieved by ensuring businesses are "highly competitive" and warns Australia "will not retreat into the downward spiral of protectionism".
Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning
Morrison makes an analogy between government debt and intergenerational care for the environment – arguing that in both spheres "we must not borrow from future generations what we cannot return to them".
On skills, Morrison says the federal government would focus on "the complexity of a system that is clunky and unresponsive to skills demands"; "the lack of clear information about what those skills needs are"; and "a funding system marred by inconsistencies and incoherence, with little accountability back to outcomes".
The National Skills Commission, lead by Adam Boyton, will provide detailed labour market analysis, including an annual report each year setting out the skill needs of Australia, replacing the existing lists for apprenticeships and skilled migration.
Morrison notes the commonwealth gives $1.5bn to states and territories for skills and workforce development, with "no line of sight" on how it is used, and merely aspirational targets with no consequences.
He argues the agreement with the states has been "ineffective in maintaining levels of investment" with all except Tasmania reducing funding to vocational education on a working-age-per-capita basis by 25% on average.
Morrison proposes better linking government funding to the needs of business and better coordination of subsidies and loans "based on principles of return on investment, to make the most of the support that is being provided".
Morrison calls for a reduction in "distortions" in incentives – such as lower or higher rates of subsidy for vocational courses in some states – by achieving greater consistency across jurisdictions, and between the VET and higher education sectors.
He also calls for more transparency and performance monitoring, citing the national hospital agreement as a model.
"Incorporating national efficient pricing for training and activity-based funding models would be a real step forward.
"That is a system my government would be prepared to invest more in."
In April 2019 a review of the sector by a former New Zealand skills minister, Steven Joyce, called for the National Skills Commission to achieve a "nationally-consistent funding model based on a shared understanding of skills needs".
In the 2019 budget, the Morrison government announced a $525m skills package – including measures to create 80,000 new apprenticeships – but it contained just $55m of new money and reallocated $463m from the Skilling Australians Fund.