Coronavirus Australia latest: 22 May at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Josh Taylor and it is Friday 22 May.
The federal government has blamed around 1,000 employers incorrectly filling in a form on how many employees they have for massively overestimating the size of the jobkeeper payment scheme.
In 550 cases the employers put down they had 1,500 employees (the dollar value of the fortnightly payment) rather than just one employee.
As a result, the 900,000 employers are estimated to only need to pay about 3.5 million workers, not 6.5 million as had been originally forecast, meaning the jobkeeper program will cost $70bn, not $130bn.
The government is so far resisting calls from Labor to extend the payment to casuals and sectors of the workforce that were not eligible for the payment.
NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian announced that restaurants, pubs and clubs will be allowed to have up to 50 people inside, if they have one person in 4 sq metres.
"Nobody will be able to take bookings of more than 10 people. A maximum booking of 10 people," she said.
"And also nobody will be able to be standing up in these venues. You have to be seated at a table, even if it's a pub. You have to be seated at the table, you have to be served at the table. There is no mingling, no standing around."
As restrictions begin to ease in South Australia there was confusion as to whether pubs could open, but premier Steven Marshall declared that pubs that have a dining option could open from today, as long as it is in keeping with the existing social distancing requirements.
Mining magnate Clive Palmer wanted to visit WA for meetings with businesspeople, senator Mathias Cormann and potential 2021 state election candidates for his United Australia party but was knocked back.
He has told the ABC he plans to take the case to the high court and challenge the state's hard border closure.
The NSW chief medical officer, Dr Kerry Chant, reported an 80-year-old woman, who had been diagnosed with Covid-19, died overnight in Concord Hospital.
Target owner Wesfarmers announced that as many as 75 of its stores across the country will close, placing more than 1,000 workers at risk of losing their jobs.
About 90 other Target stores will be turned into Kmart stores, meaning Target will lose over half its 284 stores.
Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions