Peter Dutton encourages people to challenge Queensland's Covid-19 border closures
Home affairs minister says there is 'no logic' behind refusal to reopen borders and it may be unconstitutional
The home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, has encouraged Queenslanders to challenge the constitutionality of the state's border closures, saying people are "right to test" the ban.
As state leaders continue to spar over the refusal by some premiers to reopen state borders, Dutton on Friday took the rhetoric further by telling the Nine Network he believed Queenslanders should test whether the border closures were allowed by the constitution.
"People are right to test that if they think it's not [allowed by the constitution] because it's affecting peoples lives," he said.
Dutton, who has been critical of the Queensland state Labor government throughout the pandemic, on Friday said there was "no logic" behind Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk's refusal to reopen the state's borders.
Earlier in May the Palaszczuk government released a road map for the loosening of restrictions which set 10 July as the possible date to kickstart interstate travel. But on Monday she suggested the borders were unlikely to open before September.
"Tourism operators in Cairns for example were planning to open on July 10 and then out of no where comes this September date [and] I think it caught the chief medical officer in Queensland by surprise as well," Dutton said.
"I just think she has painted herself into a corner and there's no logic to the position, so just come out and explain where the September date came from."
His intervention comes as Palaszczuk and the premiers of other states with border closures in place including Western Australia, Tasmania, South Australia and the Northern Territory, face increasing pressure to reopen interstate travel. Queensland's borders were closed in April for the first time since the influenza outbreak in 1919.
Her New South Wales counterpart, Gladys Berejiklian, has labelled it "illogical" for Queensland to keep its borders closed, while the trade minister, Simon Birmingham, has urged state and territory governments still with border closures in place to admit domestic holidaymakers as soon as possible.
While Palaszczuk initially refused to budge, saying it was "not the time for tourists to travel into Queensland because one case can cause an enormous setback to our plan" and criticising her NSW counterpart's response to the pandemic.
But on Friday Queensland's chief medical officer, Dr Jeannette Young told the ABC Queensland's borders could reopen in July.
"We have to do the checks as we go along the way. The very earliest I can see it happening is July. As to when it does happen – I really and truly don't know," she said.
On Friday the South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, said the border closures would continue until he was confident that other states had the virus under control.
"While we keep the strong borders in place, it does allow us to go a bit further and a bit faster than other states," he said.
"If we lift the borders straight away, then we can probably only go as fast as the slowest jurisdiction. My priority at the moment is getting people back to work in South Australia.
"We won't do anything that is going to let us having a second wave in South Australia.
"When we look around the world, and we see cities and countries who have been in the same position [as] South Australia with low or no cases, more often, as they have lifted restrictions, they have had to put them back in place. We are determined to get this right. We are taking those things into account before we make a decision on state borders."
Constitutional experts have differed on whether the border closures would survive a high court challenge.
Section 92 of the constitution says that trade, commerce and the movement of people among the states "shall be absolutely free", but the high court accepts there are exceptions to the rule, including to defend the public's health.
But University of Sydney constitu­tional law expert Anne Twomey told the Australian this week that the public health argument could falter as Covid-19 rates continue to fall.