Australia's arts festivals have been cut off from the world. It's an opportunity to take stock
As the sector reels from border and venue closures, festivals have a chance – and perhaps a duty – to champion local work
On Tuesday night ABC TV aired Getting Their Acts Together, a fly-on-the-wall look at Adelaide festival artistic directors Rachel Healy and Neil Armfield as they criss-cross Europe to assemble this year's program. From the constant air travel to the now-surreal scene of an unwell Armfield dosed up on cold and flu tablets before attending a packed French premiere in 2019, viewing their quest from the discomfort of 2020 carries a foreboding subtext: this would all be impossible today.
"Their job is to scour the globe for the most spectacular acts of our time," narrator Annabel Crabb explains, and despite abundant bickering and occasional creative differences, Healy and Armfield appear united in their idea of what the festival should be. Armfield speaks of a global search for "work that is genuinely great, that is the best in the world", while Healy fondly recalls her childhood in Adelaide, where the festival routinely exposed her to "something from another world".
Such values are consistent with a more traditional model of curated arts festivals, but these days they're not universally shared. As UNSW academic Caroline Wake wrote earlier this year, Adelaide festival's international focus has increasingly stood apart from its peers, which are prioritising works that deeply engage with their cities and the nation. In 2020, new Australian work was thinner on the ground than past years, and as Steve Dow observed in the Sydney Morning Herald, the lack of First Nations-centred work was conspicuous: there were more revivals of British works that premiered in 1996  than there was new Indigenous theatre or music.
Other cities have different approaches. "It's actually about what it means to be Australian," said Sydney festival artistic director Wesley Enoch of his 2020 program, which foregrounded First Nations stories and the legacies of colonisation. At Perth festival, Iain Grandage described his inaugural spread as "a celebration of our place, our home" and "a chance to acknowledge our great Western Australian artists and celebrate their visions for a shared future".
Each festival has its own history, scale and context within its city. In a place like Adelaide – which is regularly skipped over by touring productions that flock to eastern capitals – the pulling power of a major festival has its own value.
But as the coronavirus crisis shuts us off from the word and hits pause on the entire arts industry, each one of these events has a rare opportunity to take stock and ask exactly what they're here for.
Of course, this might happen out of necessity. Most Australian festivals rely on some imported acts, but with European summer festivals from the Edinburgh Fringe to Festival d'Aix-en-Provence cancelled and theatres closed, the international marketplace from which such programs are cherry-picked is in indefinite shutdown.
But out of uncertainty lies opportunity. Falls festival has already flagged plans to return with an all-Australian bill for 2020/21, in a welcome show of support for a local music industry rocked by venue closures and cancellations. The performing arts sector has fared no better, particularly among the small-to-medium companies that were already disproportionately affected by years of declining Australia Council funding. They're also often the ones producing the most innovative new Australian work.
With high profiles, comparatively secure government funding and established philanthropic networks, major arts festivals are in a position to make a difference. At one point in Getting Their Acts Together, Adelaide festival's annual bill is placed at $20m – around four times the amount of money the Australia Council has scraped together for its Covid-19 resilience fund.
And after months of cancellations and pushbacks there will be no shortage of compelling shows by Australian artists and companies looking to make up for lost time – and income – in 2021. Allowing these orphaned works to fill the hole of overseas programming – and redirecting money otherwise spent on airfares and big-ticket international draws to an ambitious program of new Australian commissions – would provide an immediate and much-needed stimulus to our cultural sector.
Some festivals are already embracing this idea. On Thursday it was revealed Melbourne International Arts festival would trade in its "international" label entirely for the new title Rising. As its first act the rebranded festival announced, it would channel $2m in funding from its cancelled August program to commissioning new work by Victorian artists for 2021. Darwin festival has also revealed plans to make its August 2020 program a "hyper-local" one.
"This moment has forced us to think deeply about the future of festivals and about how we can build greater sustainability," Rising co-artistic director Hannah Fox says. "It challenges us to champion local artists without being parochial and to find new ways to stay connected internationally."
The global network of festivals and fringes will inevitably return in some form post-Covid, and one moment in Getting Their Acts Together illustrates how this exchange can go both ways. On a scouting mission to Edinburgh International festival 2019, Armfield and Healy are rocked by the death of Wangkatjungka actor Ningali Lawford-Wolf, who was starring in Armfield's Edinburgh staging of Kate Grenville's The Secret River. Lawford-Wolf's death is devastating, but to see First Nations actors and a challenging Australian story on a British stage (albeit one mediated by a trio of white storytellers in Armfield, Grenville and playwright Andrew Bovell) is stirring.
But The Secret River – originally staged by Sydney Theatre Company in 2013, before being revived as the centrepiece of Armfield and Healy's first Adelaide festival in 2017 – is just one play, and a seven-year-old one at that. Imagine the breadth, calibre and impact of Australian stories that our festivals could help commission, nurture and unleash every year.
Getting Their Acts Together is now streaming on ABC iView