Coronavirus Australia latest: 21 May at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Josh Taylor and it is Thursday 21 May.
The last Covid-19 patient in the NT has recovered, meaning there are now no confirmed active cases of coronavirus in the NT. It has been six-and-a-half weeks since a local case in the territory.
National cabinet hasn't met this week, and now there's a fight between New South Wales, Western Australia and Queensland over border closures.
The NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, is pressuring her Queensland and WA counterparts to reopen state borders, triggering accusations of bullying between leaders and threats of travel restrictions until September.
The WA premier, Mark McGowan, and the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, have blasted Berejiklian for calling on them to lift bans on interstate travel, with the latter saying she would not be "lectured" by a state that has recorded more Covid-19 cases.
South Australia is planning on dropping back down to stage two restrictions from 5 June.
The premier, Steven Marshall, says he understands the wait is frustrating, but the state needs time.
"We can't just have a one-size-fits-all," he said of the staggered approach.
"I appreciate that it's frustrating to people and it's much easier to put the restrictions in place than to take them off. But we are only a few weeks away from being in a very good place in South Australia."
Victoria lags behind virtually every other jurisdiction in easing restrictions.
Industrial relations minister Christian Porter is flagging the government will urgently consult relevant groups about the landmark court decision that offers casual employees working permanent hours the same entitlements as permanent staff.
"If the cost impact is so great it would cause a lot of small businesses during what is the most challenging time to fold, or go into liquidation, or have to stand people down, that's not an outcome in anyone's mutual interest," he said.
"We have to talk very quickly to business and employee groups to understand whether or not the financial impact of this decision over the next six, nine, 18 months puts businesses in jeopardy.
If it does, we need to consider ways we can strengthen businesses so we preserve jobs, because if this decision was handed down six months ago it would have been a very, very different scenario. At the moment the greatest premium for the economy is employment, generating employment and saving jobs."