At Home Alone Together: Ray Martin shines in half-hour shot of anxiety-induced delirium
The satirical lifestyle-in-lockdown show is being whipped up absurdly quickly by Australia's top comedy talents. But as restrictions ease, can it stay relevant?
At Home Alone Together, the ABC's new eight-part comedy series, is one of the world's first Covid-19-inspired TV productions.
There are many, many more on the way. Jenji Kohan of Orange Is the New Black has announced she's creating a Netflix anthology series about people's lives in social isolation. Freeform is developing a limited series called Love in the Time of Corona. And here's a sentence that sounds as though it's straight out of 30 Rock: two executive producers of The Office are making a new Zoom-inspired show: "an office comedy without an office".
As Kohan said – with intense earnestness – it makes sense that TV producers would take such an interest in current events: "Our job as storytellers is to reflect reality … [We want to tell] the unique, personal, deeply human stories that illustrate how we are living apart, together."
But I doubt any of these shows will capture the chaotic depression of this reality quite as truthfully as At Home Alone Together, which premiered last week on the ABC. The satirical lifestyle show – "for a world in which nobody has a life" – is a half-hour shot of anxiety-induced delirium. It's been whipped up absurdly quickly by some of the country's top comedic talents (the second episode, which aired on Wednesday, wasn't ready for previews until late on Tuesday night), and served with zero romanticisation of this very bad time we're all having.
One of the series' greatest assets is its non-comedic talent: the Australian current affairs legend Ray Martin. Martin reads from what is essentially a Shaun Micallef script; he deadpans about "five new viruses we'd like to give to Richard Wilkins", and at one point stands grinning before the camera with tuxedo pockets full of soap: "Stay soapy!"
Martin's endearing presence adds an extra slippery layer of surrealism to the whole thing. It's oddly appropriate for a time in which broadcasters have delivered increasingly bizarre bulletins each night (remember the week you were told you can no longer hug your mum, your industry was no longer viable, and you were only allowed to get a haircut from 1.5 metres away?)
In the same style as the early 2000s SBS comedy Life Support, the show consists of "helpful" home maintenance, cooking and finance tips from comedians including Ryan Shelton, Bjorn Stewart and Anne Edmond's manic alter ego Helen Bidou. The best of these fully lean into the chaos, illustrating the complete incompatibility of corporate wellness culture or productivity pressures with the state in which we find ourselves. In last night's episode, Mark Humphries starred in a great Antiques Roadshow-themed sketch estimating the worth of an 80-year-old woman's life: "Not worth very much at all; certainly not worth destroying the economy over."
The few weaker sketches are weighed down by their familiarity: it's hard to make new jokes about baking bread and starting a podcast when that's all people have been doing for the past two months. But the team behind the show really can't be faulted for timeliness. A global pandemic was declared on 11 March and the series' producers were reportedly approaching Ray Martin at the start of April. At Home Alone Together was (and is still being) written, filmed and edited remotely by a team of creatives at an unprecedented time of flux. Christiaan Van Vuuren (Bondi Hipsters) and Adele Vuko (Skit Box) both write and appear on the show in their home with their children.
It's an incredible feat and the challenge is not over. The eight-episode show – which was undoubtedly pitched as a comfort to Australians in lockdown – is now faced with a country rapidly easing restrictions and many viewers who are likely to be keen to leave their lockdown lives behind them as soon as possible. There's still plenty of fodder for jokes – disastrous second wave of the virus pending – but it requires a team to be quick on its feet in very difficult circumstances.
It's good to see the ABC back such a worthwhile experiment and lean into full nonsense. (Notably, At Home Alone Together shares some key staff with Tonightly – that other ABC experiment that was canned just as it was hitting its stride.) It's a smart move considering the defining artform of the moment has been deeply stupid TikToks.
The real comfort that we've found "at home alone together" has nothing to do with worthy celebrity PSAs or lifestyle content; it's come from watching teenagers impersonate the prime minister and assume the foetal position while isolation baking. That's what I thought of while watching Vuko use her tears to make a homemade negroni, and Stewart spectacularly poison himself while trying to make a stew. This is a show with big TikTok energy, in the best way possible.
At Home Alone Together airs on Wednesdays at 9pm
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.