Coronavirus Australia latest: 20 May at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Josh Taylor and it is Wednesday 20 May.
Western Australia's chief health officer, Dr Andrew Robertson, said border controls should remain in place until the eastern states get their community transmission rates down. "As Western Australia increases the size of mass gatherings in the hospitality, community and sports sectors in phases 2 and 3, the reintroduction of Covid-19 back into the community from travellers could lead to substantial outbreaks that may require either delay in easing of further restrictions or reintroduction of social distancing and mass gathering measures," he said.
"If the community spread is controlled, relaxation of the interstate borders could be considered after the introduction and assessment of the impact of phase 4." It came after Australia's deputy chief medical officer, Dr Paul Kelly, said there was no medical reason to keep the borders closed.
After Guardian Australia reported on Tuesday evening that New South Wales was having issues accessing data from the Covidsafe app, Victoria reported early on Wednesday morning that one person who tested positive for coronavirus on Monday had used the app. Using the data from the app, the state's contact tracers were able to locate one person not already identified as a close contact and have them isolate for testing. It is the first recorded use of the app since it launched almost one month ago.
The federal government has denied issues with the app, despite the NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, admitting on Wednesday morning there had been "teething problems" accessing data from the iPhone version of the app.
In a long editorial, the Chinese state media outlet the Global Times slammed Australia for claiming victory over the support for an inquiry into the handling of the Covid-19 pandemic. The editorial quotes one Chinese netizen on Weibo calling Australia "this giant kangaroo that serves as a dog of the US".
Beijing also called for Australia to abandon its political manoeuvre over the inquiry, stating there were differences between the World Health Assembly resolution and the Australian proposal and "stressed that China welcomes it if Australia changes its course, completely gives up its political manoeuvre and returns to the broad consensus of the international community following the relevant WHA resolution".
The ABS released its latest figures on the economic impact of Covid-19 – this time on retail spending. It fell 17.9% in the last month, which is the biggest recorded fall – and follows the biggest rise in March, when everyone was panic buying.
South Australia will move to stage 2 restrictions from Friday, meaning up to 10 people can have a meal and alcohol in restaurants.
A woman in her 70s tested positive for Covid-19 two months after returning from international travel. Queensland health officials are now seeking to determine whether she had had it prior to arriving back in Australia or if it is a case of community transmission.
Residents in NSW can go on holiday to regional areas from 1 June, and many of the state's cultural institutions including museums and galleries will reopen on that date.