'It's done its job': Dan Tehan flags end of free childcare under weight of increasing demand
Education minister claims scheme a success but says old system was effective as more parents set to return to work
Dan Tehan has suggested the days of free childcare are numbered, as a return to the old subsidy model will be needed to keep centres viable as Australians return to work.
The education minister told Radio National on Tuesday a new report on the free model showed it had "done its job" during the Covid-19 pandemic but will need to change.
The comments come as new figures tabled by the education department to the Covid-19 response Senate inquiry on Tuesday, show just one in five Victorian independent schools and one in four non-government schools Australia-wide put their hand up for early funding, a rejection of Dan Tehan's plan to incentivise a return to in-classroom learning.
On Tuesday an education department report found that a quarter of childcare centres found the free childcare system – due to conclude at the end of June – had not helped them remain financially viable. Education department officials have blocked the release of the full report, claiming cabinet and commercial confidentiality.
Tehan claimed success because 99% of centres are still operating and said the government is consulting the sector "to make sure any changes will see the sector continue to thrive".
Tehan said "no decision" had been taken on ending free childcare but "if demand continues to increase at the levels we're seeing it, we have to understand that this system was put in place to deal with falling demand".
"It's done its job … Now we've got to help the sector dealing with increasing demand and, as we know, the old system was working effectively."
Tehan noted demand is increasing because children are going back to school and parents are going back to work as restrictions ease, and spruiked the old subsidy system which ensured "73% of families paid no more than $5 an hour … and it was working".
Tehan also held out the possibility of more funding for non-government schools. He revealed the federal government is considering "modifications" to the new funding system – which considers parents' income – and "we're also examining some of the loadings as well".
On 29 April the education minister offered independent and Catholic schools to bring forward up to 25% of their funding if they met conditions to return to school in term 2 and aim for 50% attendance by 1 June.
The initiative was largely superseded by states announcing a return to in-classroom learning as health results improved. The New South Wales government phased in a return to school from 11 May, with all classrooms to be reopened by 25 May, and Victorian schools will return from 26 May with all grades back by 9 June.
The Victorian education minister and independent schools were fierce critics of the incentive, arguing the federal government was using taxpayer money to force schools to ignore the advice at the time of the Victorian chief health officer not to attend in-person.
The education department figures show that 827 non-government schools nationwide said they would reopen by 1 June, with 678, or 24% requesting early funding.
Some 809 schools declared they had a plan to achieve 50% school attendance by that date, with 667 or 23% asking for early funding.
Catholic schools largely rejected the offer – with none claiming the payment in any state or territory except the Northern Territory and South Australia.
About two-thirds of independent schools complied with the conditions in New South Wales, but in Victoria just one-third met the conditions and one-fifth asked for early payment.
On Tuesday, education department officials told the Covid-19 response Senate inquiry that schools will only need to declare they have plans to boost attendance, and will not need to prove they achieve a 50% attendance rate.
Alex Gordon, the deputy secretary for schools, said as the program simply brings forward funding due in July it was judged a "low risk" so schools need only "provide assurance that they have a plan" to qualify.
Education officials also confirmed that the government's $18bn funding guarantee for universities and promotion of a shift towards short courses does not boost universities' funding.
Rob Heferen, the deputy secretary for higher education, said the benefit of the guarantee is that universities will receive federal funding even if domestic enrolments drop, while the "flexibility" to offer short courses instead of longer bachelor degrees will be "extremely valuable" to some universities.
Heferen acknowledges that universities are experiencing "extreme" pressures, but argued their financial position is "pretty solid" because many have large cash reserves and international student enrolments had held up in semester one.
Just one-fifth of international students, about 120,000, were unable to come to Australia due to Covid-19, although universities anticipate enrolments will fall away in the second semester before recovering in 2021 or 2022, he said.
Heferen confirmed that after a series of changes to jobkeeper rules no universities had qualified for the $1,500 fortnightly wage subsidy, despite being eligible.
But he defended the "couple of variations" to the rules affecting universities, arguing that a "quirk in the GST rules" would have meant universities could exclude government revenues to reach the threshold for downturn in revenue.
A change to force universities to count revenue over six months – not one month like other businesses – was designed to prevent the drop in international enrolments "crunched up" in a particular month allowing universities to meet the threshold.
Labor's education spokeswoman, Tanya Plibersek, said the universities relief package "doesn't include a dollar of extra funding" for "the 20,000 short courses announced by Scott Morrison with great fanfare".
Liberal deputy chair, James Paterson, rejected Labor's claim that universities had been "abandoned" by the government.