Queensland criticised for holding back rapid Covid-19 testing in remote Aboriginal communities
Test funded by federal government cuts wait times to 45 minutes, but Queensland Health has vetoed the rollout
Aboriginal health organisations say the Queensland government is holding back a $3.3m national rollout of rapid Covid-19 testing in remote Aboriginal communities, putting concerns for health worker safety ahead of conducting what they say is a "gold standard" test endorsed by the World Health Organization and already being used in other states and territories.
In April, the federal government announced funding for a rapid-testing program in Aboriginal communities which cuts wait times to 45 minutes, calling it "a game-changing improvement" for people in remote areas who are currently waiting several days to receive their results.
Eight-three sites were nominated nationally, around 20 of them in Queensland. The Kirby Institute has been training Aboriginal healthcare workers in how to conduct the tests and has supplied personal protective equipment. Testing in some sites is already up and running.
But Queensland Health has vetoed the rollout.
"The chief health officer wants to ensure any use of rapid-point-of-care testing for coronavirus in remote communities is conducted to the same high level of safety standards that apply in metropolitan locations," a health department spokesperson said.
"The safety of health workers and residents of remote communities should not be compromised."
Queensland Health said it has established a network of 35 pathology laboratories, 29 of which can undertake rapid-point-of-care testing, and is talking to the federal government about an expansion of testing in remote locations.
But the public health medical officer at Apunipima Cape York Health Council, Dr Mark Wenitong, said the decision "doesn't make a lot of sense to us".
"This is one of the safest tests I've ever seen. And it's point of care so it's not meant to be done in a laboratory.
"And if you're taking the same precautions that you would anyway around infection control, then that risk's completely minimised.
"We have the right training, Kirby Institute supply that and the PPE as well. So if you've got all the right training, there are no problems around infection issues for the operator.
Wenitong said when he was tested in Cairns, the results took three days to arrive and he's concerned by how quickly the virus can spread in that timeframe, especially now that restrictions are easing.
"We can't control what people do for three or four days, especially when there are no isolation or quarantine facilities. In many communities there's very little infrastructure. And we will be looking at a lot larger percentage of community transmission."
Wenitong said the test is a "gold standard", endorsed by WHO for these conditions.
"It's important to have a fast turnaround time so that's kind of part of what the WHO principles for removing restrictions is around," he said. "If you have everything else shored up and the ability to assess fast and respond fast, then it's easier to release restrictions but if you don't, you're leaving communities vulnerable.
"It's a very, very important tool in being able to respond quickly. And to be honest, we've been lucky.
"We just need to be on guard and this [test] just makes it easier."
The program is an initiative of the Kirby Institute, in partnership with Flinders University, and has been developed in consultation with Aboriginal community-controlled health services.
The GeneXpert device can detect Covid-19 directly and "has close to 100% sensitivity and specificity", Kirby Institute's Rebecca Guy said.
"The test is the only one approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) for point-of-care use.
"The steps involved are simple and have been deemed low or minimal risk by state governments and the World Health Organization."
Sites were selected to ensure no community is more than two to three hours' drive from a testing facility.