Coronavirus Australia latest: 18 May at a glance
A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia
Good evening, here are the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Josh Taylor and it is Monday 18 May.
The New South Wales chief medical officer, Dr Kerry Chant, reported a man in his 60s, who had been diagnosed with Covid-19, died. Chant said the man had underlying health conditions.
The man is the 48th to die in NSW and the 99th death across Australia.
Students in New South Wales will be in classrooms full-time from Monday 25 May. Most students in the state are currently at one day in classrooms per week.
The NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, is set to announce the change tomorrow.
Australia has the backing of 122 nations for a motion calling for a full investigation into the handling of the Covid-19 outbreak.
The draft motion, supported by countries including the members of the European Union and the African Group, the UK, Russia, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, calls for a systemic review of the world's response to Covid-19.
The latest version of the motion calls on the World Health Organization's director general to initiate a "stepwise process of impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, including using existing mechanisms, as appropriate, to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19".
Strict new rules for public transport have been put in place in NSW, including limiting the number of passengers to 32 for train carriages, 12 for buses and 45 for ferries.
There will be green spots put on seats so people can know where they can sit.
Train stations may be closed if they reach capacity, and transport apps will alert commuters as to whether there is enough space on the public transport.
A dozen McDonald's stores in the north and western parts of Melbourne were shut on Monday due to a delivery driver who had been a close contact of the Fawkner McDonald's cluster testing positive. The driver was asymptomatic and visited the 12 outlets. The stores will be deep-cleaned before being reopened.
Labor leader Anthony Albanese said he doesn't think the jobseeker payments should return to their pre-coronavirus level, but he does think it should not be as high as it is right now.
"Now I don't think it should be kept at the level where it is, where jobseeker is higher than the aged pension. That's not a reasonable proposition.
"But it is the case I think that jobseekers shouldn't go back down to $40 a day."
The federal government is standing firm that the payment will only remain at its current level for the extent of the pandemic.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics said women were more impacted than men, with 28% of women reporting feeling lonely, compared with 16% of men.
People also reported more eating of snack food and drinking alcohol, as well as more time in front of the TV.
Australia's coronavirus lockdown rules explained: can I still visit my partner and other questions