Network Ten to close online news site 10 Daily, with the loss of 20 editorial jobs
Less than a week after Buzzfeed announced the closure of its Australian news operation, the media business takes another hit
Network Ten is shutting down its online news site, 10 Daily, at the end of the week, leaving about 20 editorial staff out of a job.
Guardian Australia understands employees at 10 Daily were told on Monday that the site would stop producing content by Friday.
Some IT and social media employees would be kept on to continue running Network 10's streaming services, but dozens of staff would be let go, including online reporters.
"Network 10's digital media strategy is evolving to capitalise on our momentum and match the new global operating model. That means an increased emphasis on streaming services and social media," a spokesperson for Network Ten said in a statement.
"Over the past two years, 10 Daily has established a strong presence and a loyal following, thanks to a passionate and hardworking team producing great content. We are grateful for their efforts to drive that success.
"As a result of the strategic change, however, 10 Daily will cease to exist as a standalone website. Some of the 10 Daily roles will remain. Some of the 10 Daily content will also transfer to 10 Play and our social media brands."
10 Daily was established two years ago and it's understood the site was exceeding its target views and had record traffic during the Covid-19 pandemic.
The move appears to have been in consideration since CBS, Network 10 Australia's US parent company, merged with media giant Viacom in December.
The chief content officer of ViacomCBS Australia and New Zealand, Beverly McGarvey, said in an email sent to all staff the move was not solely a reaction to revenue lost due to the pandemic.
"The recent impact of Covid-19 on the media industry has reinforced the need to continue to align our business with our evolving customer needs and global business model, but I want to stress that the changes are part of our broader strategy, not a reaction to recent events," the email read.
"As part of the measures being undertaken, some staff will leave Network 10 and VicomCBS Australia and New Zealand. To those staff, let me express my sincere thanks for all your hard work, dedication and professionalism during your time here. We will fully support you during this period and I wish you the very best for the future."
The news comes just four days after Buzzfeed announced it would be closing the news arms of its Australian and UK offices, costing five Australian editorial staff their jobs.
More than 150 Australian newsrooms have shut since January 2019, including regional titles such as the Sunraysia Daily in Victoria, and Cape and Torres News in Northern Queensland.