Anglicare boss says Newmarch House residents with Covid-19 should have gone straight to hospital
Grant Millard says with hindsight he would have insisted on the practice, but maintains aged care home was complying with state health strategy
The chief executive of Anglicare has said "in hindsight" he would have sent all Covid-19 positive residents at the Newmarch House aged care home to hospital immediately, suggesting the decision to keep them at the facility came from government.
Eighteen residents of Newmarch House, in western Sydney, have died and a further 71 cases are associated with the facility at the centre of one of the country's worst outbreaks.
Grant Millard told ABC radio on Monday morning things should have been done differently, confirming remarks first reported by the Sydney Morning Herald at the weekend.
"Look, if I had the time again I would be insisting people who are Covid positive go to hospital," Millard said.
"In hindsight that would have been my preference."
Later in the interview, Millard stepped back slightly from those remarks, suggesting a case-by-case approach.
"These people are actually in their own home. You know, that's where they're comfortable … It's not as clear-cut as saying, 'get someone to the hospital'. But I think given the scale of the outbreak here, given the challenges with staffing, and at the same time we heard that they were no elective surgeries and lots of hospital staff around, it does beg the question about whether they should have just gone to hospital."
Millard has distanced himself from the decision to treat the majority of residents who tested positive at the home.
"I think there was a containment strategy by state health, and we complied with that and a 'hospital at home' program was implemented," he said. "I do understand with the public health outbreak at the time there were real concerns about not wanting to have another Ruby Princess."
The Newmarch outbreak is believed to have begun when an infected staff member came to work multiple times with extremely mild symptoms. The response from Anglicare and government bodies has been criticised after new infections continued to appear more than two weeks into a full lockdown of the home.
No new cases have been reported among residents for the past 19 days, and no new cases from staff linked to the facility for 11.
On Monday morning the New South Wales chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, defended the decisions made in the early days of the outbreak.
"There was a process of having expert clinical advice about what was in the best interest of the residents of Newmarch House, and that was the strategy that was considered appropriate. There's a lot of issues around balancing for elderly people about moving them into a hospital or into another aged care facility," she said.
"There was an expert group of clinicians involved in setting up the plans … It is very complex decision-making. I wouldn't want to second-guess any of the decisions made by the clinicians on the ground at the time."
State and commonwealth health departments worked together to contain the outbreaks, she said.
Chant acknowledged there were lessons to be learned from Newmarch House, but her comments focused on how to avoid introducing the virus rather than governmental responses to new clusters.
Millard said no Newmarch House residents were barred from being treated in a hospital, and that all Covid-19 positive residents were consulted on treatment options, the majority electing to stay in the home.
During the height of the outbreak at Newmarch House, some family members of residents took to standing outside the home every afternoon, protesting the lack of communication from the facility.
Millard admitted that Anglicare had failed to keep families in the loop.
"I readily acknowledge that communication was a problem. We were scrambling [for] staff just to provide basic care, and we just didn't do a good enough job with communicating with families," he said.
Earlier in the month aged care royal commissioners Tony Pagone and Lynelle Briggs announced that the inquiry would specifically look at "the lessons from what has happened at Newmarch House".
Millard said he was not worried about inquires from the commission.
"I've got no concern about the facts being known, and I think given the context that this was in, the severe challenge that everyone was in, the government and ourselves, we will learn from this," Millard said.
The office of the federal aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, has been approached for comment.