Greens urge $300bn more debt as they seek to outflank Labor on Covid-19 recovery spending
Party accuses Labor and Coalition of shrinking from spending needed to revive post-coronavirus economy
The Greens have proposed increasing government debt by $300bn in a bid to kickstart the economy out of the Covid-19 contraction through investments in industry, infrastructure and renewable energy.
The Invest to Recover plan, released on Monday, sets up the Greens' economic argument leading into the next election as a battle against Coalition austerity and Labor, which it says is "afraid of sensible borrowing to invest in our future".
The biggest ticket items include a jobs guarantee, free tertiary education for under 30s, $24bn over 10 years for public education, a $12bn manufacturing fund, 500,000 new public and community homes, $25bn on public transport, $6bn to modernise the electricity grid, a $6bn nature fund and $2.3bn for the arts.
The Greens also propose retaining key features of the coronavirus support packages including free childcare and the doubling of unemployment benefits to $1,100 a fortnight.
While the minor party holds just one lower house seat and can only govern in partnership with other parties, its policies from a banking royal commission, lifting Newstart and preventing cuts to penalty rates have proved influential, especially over Labor.
Labor has already proposed the government should provide more support for the arts sector and spend its way out of the Covid-19 contraction with a housing construction package and a nation-building infrastructure program.
But Anthony Albanese has warned the shadow front bench that, if elected, Labor would face a "constrained fiscal situation" and the shadow finance minister, Katy Gallagher, has called for an audit into government debt, in a bid to shame the Coalition for doubling gross debt since it took office in 2013.
The Greens estimate Australia's net debt would rise from 30% of GDP to 44% under its plan – an increase of $300bn over 10 years – which it argues is "still less than half of the advanced economies' average of 95% during the pandemic and well below those countries' debt levels even before Covid-19 (which was 76%)".
The Greens believe debt will be less if revenue measures are implemented, such as reversing stage two and three of the Coalition's income tax cuts.
The policy document accuses Liberal and Labor governments of "turning public debt into a bogeyman". But during the Covid-19 crisis "government borrowing has saved the day, keeping employees and employers afloat during the lockdown and ensuring those who have lost their jobs can still afford to eat and pay the rent", it says.
In the 2019 budget, the Coalition predicted a return to surplus this year, but it was forced instead to spend $194bn on economic supports for households and businesses as Covid-19 and related restrictions plunged the Australian economy into the biggest contraction since the Great Depression.
The Greens policy argued that governments have access to "the cheapest money in history" with interest rates less than 1% on 10-year bonds, and less than 2% for 30 year bonds.
"There's never been a better time for governments to borrow to invest given that interest rates are projected to stay at record low levels for many years."
"Liberal and Labor say that we can't borrow any further and the cupboard is bare. Of course, they were saying that even before the coronavirus crisis, but history shows that if we borrow to invest and grow a clean economy, we will be able to easily service the debt and ensure our prosperity."
The Greens cited expansion after the second world war, at which time "debt skyrocketed to record highs" but was "reduced back down to normal levels within a decade because it was invested and grew the economy".
The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, said: "Depression-era job numbers demand a Depression-era response. That means not shying away from debt, but using it to invest in building a cleaner, fairer Australia."
"We can't cut our way out of this crisis. The government and big corporations are calling for more cuts – to company taxes, to public spending, to workers' rights – but that is a recipe for disaster. We must invest to recover."
The Coalition proposes to reduce debt through economic growth, but plans to do so by encouraging business investment through lower tax and deregulation, particularly of industrial relations laws.
Labor's shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, has said that Labor's highest priority is to "save as many jobs and communities as possible" but in the long run he still believes "debt matters".
A jobs guarantee is backed by some members of the Labor left, including MP Ged Kearney, who told Guardian Australia last month that although it was "not Labor policy" it was "a very important discussion to have" to drive towards full employment.
"By world standards Australia has low debt," Kearney said, adding that countries can carry debt "infinitely if they need to" because "it's not like a mortgage where somebody is going to come along and repossess the country".