University of Melbourne opts out of union deal despite loss of $400m due to coronavirus
Proposal would save jobs lost due to effect of Covid-19 on international students but conflicts with responsibilities, university says
Melbourne University has decided to opt out of a controversial plan put forward by the tertiary sector union designed to save academic positions in return for pay cuts of up to 15%, saying it does not need to be part of the negotiated framework.
In a letter to its staff on Friday, Melbourne University said that although it was facing a $400m shortfall as a result of the loss of international students this year, and an even bigger fall next year, it was not interested in pursing the measures put forward by the union to deal with the financial fallout from the Covid-19 pandemic.
"While we respect the sprit in which the negotiations have been undertaken, and understand that this framework may suit the requirements of other institutions we have formed the view that we can develop an approach that better protects the interests of our people and the university's long term sustainability," the letter said.
Melbourne University said one aspect of the proposal – a "National Expert Panel" which would include union representation to scrutinise proposals – constituted a conflict with its statutory responsibilities.
Others of the group of eight universities are expected to follow suit. It is unclear whether Melbourne University believes it will not need to cut staff, or whether it wants freedom to respond to the financial crisis triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic to restructure their staff and shed casuals.
The university sector has been extremely hard hit by the Covid-19 crisis, which has stopped international students travelling to Australia and closed campuses. Estimates of the loss of revenue are between $3bn to $4.6bn in 2020, but could be worse next year as students revise their plans in the face of the pandemic.
The main problem facing universities is that they are ineligible for jobkeeper because it requires a 50% fall in revenues if turnover is over $1bn. Universities have seen their costs increase as they take lessons online and continue to serve enrolled students but they have seen their revenue fall by as much as 40% without international revenues.
The federal government has rejected calls for a bailout in the form of loans though it has guaranteed current levels of federal support which are linked to domestic enrolments.
In a deal struck on Wednesday between the National Tertiary Education Union (NTEU) and the universities' industrial association, the union agreed to exchange temporary wage cuts for rules forbidding universities standing down staff without pay and other protections.
NTEU president Alison Barnes said the agreement aims to protect more than 12,000 jobs in return for temporary, up to one-year salary reductions between 5% and 15% for some university workers at the hardest hit campuses. Each university will decide whether to implement the deal on its campus.
But the deal came with a proviso that the union would be involved in executive boards at each campus to review the university finances and the proposed budget cuts.
This appears to be a sticking point for some of the wealthier universities.
At the same time the deal has been controversial with some NTUE members and with the union that represents non-academic staff.
Barnes called on Melbourne University to promptly clarify what their intentions are.
"Wholesale sackings at this time would be callous and and heartless," she said.
"We want the federal government to step in with a financial package for the sector. What about the role that universities will play in re-skilling if we go into a deep recession?" she said.