Dining out now: 'A no-show can be a mortal blow to any hospitality business'
In normal circumstances, not honouring a booking is hard on restaurants – but with coronavirus restrictions, it's a disaster
As Australians slowly start to come back into venues, there's been a lot of speculation about what the new world of hospitality should look like. I think there are actually two Restaurant 2.0s: one for the restaurants and venues themselves, and another for the people who frequent them.
Let's look at the people first. As a city, a society, a nation we've desperately missed our bars and restaurants. Sitting at home during lockdown got a bit boring. I've come to realise how often my conversations with friends revolved around where we've been going and what we've been doing. We've run out of things to say!
It's not surprising that there was such excitement when the regulations started to ease. It's also not surprising that there was such collective indignation when reports emerged via social media that on the first weekend of reopening, some groups had booked at restaurants and failed to show up or cancel.
It happened to us last week, and my staff and I were gutted. It was not just any booking – it was a Saturday night booking at 8pm. In restaurant terms that's the money maker, when the drinks are flowing and diners are having a great night out. In an industry with notoriously slim profit margins, it's our chance each week for significant trade.
In the current circumstances, however, 10 people was our entire capacity. So that no-show accounted for 100% of our revenue. They didn't call or email to cancel. And we had a waiting list of potential diners who we'd had to turn away and who, with notice, would have happily taken that table.
As we deal with social distancing and venue limitations, it's easy to see how a no-show can be a mortal blow to any hospitality business. Rather than dwell on the negative, though, I'd rather put it in perspective. Pre-Covid, no shows had become fairly rare – maybe 5% of bookings – compared to a decade ago, when they might have accounted for up to 30%. Restaurants I managed back then were known to have overbooked regularly, just to make up the shortfall. And for every no-show right now there are dozens of people wanting a restaurant booking.
We're not alone. The ugly no-show issue raised its head in a bunch of places in Sydney in the first weekends of post-lockdown trading. However, from the messages that those businesses received on social media, people are overwhelmingly supportive of the industry.
While our customers have had time to think about how much they've missed restaurants, the hospitality industry has also had time to take stock of how business is done. Many of us agree that Restaurant 2.0 needs to address a few operational issues.
Bookings are key, and online booking are the way forward – it makes the process simple and easy for the customer. For the venue, not only does online booking free up staff, it also captures the data now required by government in the event that contact tracing is required. At Prince of York we have always welcomed walk-ins and will continue to do so someday, but under current guidelines we have to record the name and contact details of every person who enters our venue.
There's also another advantage for venues using online bookings. The sites are user reviewed, so if a potential diner has a history of no-shows, you'll know about it.
Many restaurants have been considering asking for pre-payment or deposits for meals. Some already do. For the really expensive fine diners I can see how this is necessary, to manage costs and avoid the loss of revenue that those no-shows can cause. We don't want to go down the path of pre-payment – it takes away the approachability and spontaneity that is hallmark of our venue, and we would have to add an additional layer of admin to implement it. However if we're offering entertainment, such as a live DJ or comedy act, which are all things we plan on doing, then it's something we're going to have to consider in the future to protect our own livelihood.
Discounting is another key issue. We so often see a race to the bottom with prices and specials, just to get bums on seats, when venues would do better to add value. I believe Covid-19 has actually saved some businesses rather than put them in jeopardy. It will make everyone rethink what they do, make sure they have an original offer and get their service right. Customers also need to understand what a drink or a dish costs, but more importantly what it is worth – even before it is served to them.
That's what we're working towards, and that depends on everybody doing their part – especially following through with that coveted booking.
When something is taken away from you, you should value it even more when it comes back.