Calamitous GDP figures show UK economy has fallen off a cliff
It goes without saying that the 20.4% contraction in April is the worst on record
In a perverse way, the record plunge in the economy in April is a measure of success. The government has got what it wanted from the lockdown: a fall in new cases of Covid-19, a drop in the death rate, a decline in the R number to below one.
In April the UK government set out these five tests it said had to be met before they would consider easing coronavirus lockdown restrictions:
It has been the ultimate pyrrhic victory, though, because the collateral damage has been enormous. A 20.4% contraction in activity is what you get if you close schools, tell people to stay at home and only shop for essentials, close the restaurants and bars, and shutter the theatres and cinemas.
From the moment the lockdown was announced at the end of March it has been obvious the April growth figures from the Office for National Statistics would be a horror show. All that was at issue was whether the news would be bad, really bad, calamitous or so far off the scale that even the most hardcore pessimist had not envisaged it. In the end, it was merely calamitous.
It goes without saying the April performance of the economy was the worst for a single month on record. The decline was three times as big as that in March and 10 times as big as anything before Covid-19. The economy was 25% smaller in April than in February. Almost two decades of growth has been wiped out in two months.
The ONS has only been publishing monthly data since 1997. But even had there been data going back 100 years, it is hard to believe anything could have matched the first full month of Covid-19 restrictions.
The scale of the decline in activity should not have been a surprise because pretty much everything in the private sector, outside of food retailing, was either closed or running at a fraction of its normal capacity. Planes were grounded, restaurants and hotels were shut. It was impossible to get a haircut. Output of the accommodation and food services sector (hotels, restaurants and bars) was down by almost 92% on its pre-Covid level. There was a drop of 47% in arts and recreation.
As things stand, the economy is on course to shrink by around 15% this year, something that has not happened for 300 years. To prevent that, three things need to happen. Lockdown restrictions have to be eased to speed up the pace of recovery. That has to be done without triggering a second wave of infections. Finally, more support from the Bank of England and the Treasury will be required.
Of the three, the only certainty is that the government will provide extra stimulus in the coming months. The one crumb of comfort from the figures is that April will mark the bottom of the trough. Albeit less rapidly than in some other European countries, the economy started to grow again in May as lockdown restrictions were gradually lifted but the improvement will be marginal. Britain's economy has fallen off a cliff. It will be a long climb back.