The Guardian view on the danger for the arts: action is needed now
After three months of silence, Oliver Dowden must do more than issue vague reassurances
Twelve and a half weeks have passed since, on 16 March, Boris Johnson told Britons they must "avoid" theatres. For 12 of those weeks, the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, has remained silent on the devastating consequences of the prime minister's words on the cultural fabric of the UK. Lockdown was necessary. But so was rapidly forming a plan, along with colleagues in the devolved governments, on how to prevent the collapse of the infrastructure of the arts. And yet there has been no action, aside from the rushed pulling together of a cultural renewal "taskforce" on 20 May.
Organisations across Britain, from the Globe and the Southbank Centre in London to the Hippodrome in Birmingham and the Royal Lyceum in Edinburgh, are warning that they may be forced to close. Sir Simon Rattle and Sir Mark Elder have warned of a devastated musical landscape and the potential loss of UK orchestras. The government's furlough scheme and support for the self-employed have provided help for many organisations and individuals. But many have fallen through the cracks. In evidence given to the parliamentary select committee on culture this week, the Musicians' Union told MPs that nearly 40% of musicians qualify for no support at all. This is a real, raw question of people's livelihoods.
The post of culture secretary is not a straightforward one. Culture, media and sport are disparate areas with minimal overlap. Broadcasting is its own delicate policy area, missteps in which have profound consequences for the whole nation. But it would be a grave mistake for any culture secretary to understand the "arts" part of the remit as merely an opportunity for outings to galleries and the odd opera ticket – were such pleasures open to anyone at the moment. The arts are a vital force in the economy, a huge part of the identity of the UK and its civic fabric, and give meaning and joy to individual existences. Despite the strange inverted snobbery peculiar to British public life that sometimes caricatures them thus, they are not a frivolous or elitist optional extra; they are part of the warp and weft of people's lives.
Mr Dowden has finally emerged from his silence to reassure the public via an interview in the London Evening Standard that he is in fact engaged in "intricate discussions" with the Treasury to prevent the collapse of the arts. He says that he wants to "get the money flowing", and promises not to "let anyone down". But it is not enough to do a bad patch-up job on the existing, damaged cultural infrastructure. A competent culture secretary would be using the opportunity to tap into imaginative new thinking, much of which is coming from beyond big institutions, about how the arts could become more local, more embedded in communities, more meaningful in people's lives.
A good culture secretary would also be considering how not to squander the limited progress that has been made in diversity and representation on and off stage – an issue of which Mr Dowden will doubtless be aware after recent open letters addressed to him by disabled arts leaders and by black, Asian and minority ethnic theatre professionals. The time for vaguely reassuring statements passed weeks ago – 12 weeks ago. Concrete progress and clarity is urgently needed. There is a window of opportunity still. But it is closing.