UK coronavirus border controls more effective if done earlier, MPs told
Health experts also challenge government's assessment of impact of imported cases
Stricter border controls would have been more effective if introduced much earlier in the Covid-19 pandemic, public health experts have told MPs, as they also challenged the UK assessment of the impact of imported cases.
The home affairs select committee took evidence from experts from Hong Kong, Singapore and New Zealand on measures taken in their respective countries, all of which adopted stricter approaches to the border than the UK, and much earlier.
Since Monday, most people arriving in the UK have been required to quarantine in a nominated address for 14 days, a shift in policy that has provoked a significant response from the aviation and hospitality lobby and raised eyebrows among scientists.
While questioning the logic of introducing an enforced quarantine for all arrivals in the UK at this time, the experts all agreed it was not too late to introduce border restrictions and warned that mass overseas tourism this summer was "not a good idea".
Sir David Skegg, an epidemiologist at the University of Otago in New Zealand, said: "These border measures would be most effective if they had been done very early.
"As with New Zealand, all these cases were imported. This disease did not originate in the UK. It would have been much more effective if you'd done this in February."
New Zealand has been ramping up its border restrictions since 3 February, when measures were put in place in relation to China. It is now closed to all but permanent citizens and residents, all of whom have to quarantine in a hotel under supervision upon arrival. New Zealand attempted self-quarantine but it was flouted.
The UK has not enforced quarantine until now and has kept its border open to arrivals throughout the pandemic. In the first three months of the year there were nearly 25 million arrivals into the UK. This has dropped by roughly 99% in April, when there were about 100,000 arrivals by air.
Prof Gabriel Leung, the dean of the Li Ka Shing faculty of medicine at Hong Kong University, said: "If you look around the world, the places that have imposed border restrictions earlier on have tended to come out much better with local outbreaks."
Leung said studies had shown where cases in the UK originated from. "If you had imposed border restrictions earlier on that picture would have looked quite different."
The Home Office has relied on a scientific assessment that the number of imported cases were about 0.5% of domestic cases and as a result decided stricter border restrictions earlier on would not have had an impact.
But the experts questioned this calculation.
Prof Teo Yik Ying, the dean of Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, said: "In a country like Singapore, essentially all our cases are the result of importations.
"Be it secondary, tertiary or subsequent chains, I see this as crucial. When we start thinking of figures like 0.5% it grossly underestimates the impact of importation risk because everyone who comes in will seed additional clusters and each member within that cluster will go on and then it's the dangerous nature of Covid-19 being so infectious."
He added: "I would hesitate to put much faith in that figure of 0.5% - is it the only primary chain of infections? All the infections will be attributed to importations."
Asked what they thought about reports giving the impression that Britons were "clamouring" to head overseas this summer on holidays, the experts all urged caution.
Ying said summer overseas tourism "does not sound like a good idea".
"If we look at what the current situation in Asia is, for many countries in east Asia the cases are actually very low. Regardless of that, the government are not looking at mass-market travel and tourism."
Leung said: "It would be premature for any kind of mass-market holiday."
All the experts said it was not too late to enforce border controls but they had to play a part alongside physical distancing and test-and-trace systems.