'It's the bit the NHS cannot fix': Demand for cancer support soars during lockdown
With treatment altered or surgery postponed, more cancer patients are seeking help for mental wellbeing from charities struggling to fund it
As the UK resigned itself to life under lockdown, Alyson Gibbons felt her world was falling apart. Two weeks earlier, doctors had told her that her breast cancer had returned and was no longer curable. "The little ray of hope was squashed, and it hit me hard," she says. "I felt that sick feeling in the pit of my stomach, like I had the day that I was first diagnosed." Gibbons, 47, thanks the Wessex Cancer Trust, a local charity that narrowly survived a funding crisis in 2019, for piecing back together "the jigsaw of me that doctors and hospitals couldn't complete".
When she was first diagnosed in 2017, its centre in Chandler's Ford, Hampshire, offered her sanctuary. Somewhere to listen and laugh, and to sit quietly and cry, cocooned in a "blanket of understanding". When the cancer resurfaced in March, "the first place I went was Wessex", she says. Only now, her counselling takes place by phone and the group catch-ups are over video-conferencing app, Zoom.
When the UK lockdown was announced, charities that provide psychological and practical support to the 367,000 people diagnosed with cancer each year scrambled to put the peer groups, therapies and counselling that draw visitors to their centres on to telephone lines and virtual platforms.
Nigel Holligan, 67, had surgery for prostate cancer in 2013 and helps run a monthly support group in East Ham, East London, for Orchid, a national male cancer charity. The group includes a high proportion of older men with an African-Caribbean background from London boroughs that have been heavily hit by Covid-19. Since the lockdown began the group has met over Zoom. "I was pleasantly surprised with how many were already familiar with the technology, given that the group's average age is probably mid-60s. We've also taught others who were not so familiar how to use it, so that no one is left out," he says.
Being cooped up and unable to see loved ones has made the body blow of cancer harder for many. Vicki Day, 58, from Lytham St Annes in Lancashire, learned that she had throat cancer in late January and had her radiotherapy mask made and fitted with her father and daughter beside her just before lockdown. A week later she began her hospital treatment alone. "Under normal circumstances my father would have spent every day eating cake and reading magazines in the coffee shop and my daughter would have been with me," she says. "Sitting in the wheelchair and being sick and desperately needing someone was just crushing ... it would have made a huge difference having my daughter ask questions at the weekly reviews. My mind went blank and I just wanted my bed."
Some cancer charities say they are worried that lockdown will exacerbate anxiety. The Teenage Cancer Trust (TCT), which has 28 dedicated units in primary treatment centres for cancer, says that large numbers of young people have told the charity that they've found it really tough not being able to see friends and family or continue to work. Although the charity provides digital support and activities, it has had to suspend face-to-face activities. These "provide important psychological support, and we're worried about the toll this [lack of in-person meetings] will take on young people's mental health longer-term," says Kate Collins, TCT's chief executive.
For others, coronavirus has halted their tentative steps back to a normal life. Anna Robertson, 38, was on a phased return to work following breast cancer treatment when the pandemic sent her plans into reverse. She's furloughed and unsure when she'll be able to work again. Meanwhile, she now monitors every ache and pain. "The weird thing after a cancer diagnosis is that every time you sneeze, you think, oh my God, is it cancer?"
So digital support is providing a lifeline. Calls to cancer support helplines have soared. Colette Cowan, head of service delivery at Wessex, says: "We have seen an increase in demand for our services, both from existing and new clients. We've seen an increase in clients wanting connection with others. Cancer diagnoses haven't stopped during Covid-19 and those people have been seeking support through our telephone and remote services. We've also had a huge increase in the number of family members seeking support on behalf of a loved one who has been isolated and struggling."
And demand for support is likely to rise still further after the pandemic. Analysis by Cancer Research UK suggests that as Covid-19 deaths increased, millions of people have not been screened and 24,000 cases have gone undiagnosed. Others have had treatment altered or surgery postponed, raising fears of an explosion of mental suffering as people learn that they face more extensive surgery, or that their cancer is no longer treatable.
Although demand for help is soaring, charity budgets are plummeting, as one by one the fundraising events, marathons and galas that pay for their activities have been mothballed or scrapped.
"At the moment we're predicting that our funding will be down by about 40% and many in the sector are predicting 50%," says Laura Lee, chief executive of Maggie's, a cancer support charity with a network of 23 local centres in the UK. "Like everyone we're scenario planning … but if a second lockdown comes, that could decimate income."
For smaller charities, the squeeze threatens cuts and even closures. "We've definitely felt the financial pressure a lot of small charities are under," says Cowan. "Without the support of our local communities, the dedication of our staff and volunteers, and the ability to secure some short-term grants to see us through, I don't know how we would have survived Covid-19 and the impact it's had on fundraising." That petrifies Gibbons. She says charities that rebuild the mental health of people diagnosed with cancer are unique in what they do. "It's the bit that the NHS, brilliant as they are, cannot fix," she says. "When I was in a hole, it was Wessex that gave me the strength to go back home at night and be a wife and mum again."
A spokeswoman for the government says the government is providing an "unprecedented package of government support" to charities. "Charities working to support people with cancer have received grants through the £750m charity support package and small- to medium-sized organisations can apply to the £200m coronavirus community support fund for further financial support," she says. "Charities can also benefit from the coronavirus job retention scheme and the coronavirus business interruption loan scheme."
But some cancer charities say they do not know if they will get any of the £750m. "We still do not know if we are eligible," says a Teenage Cancer Trust spokeswoman. "What we do know is that we need to fill this £5m funding gap to ensure we can continue meeting the needs of this vulnerable group through this crisis and beyond."
One bright spot is that charities that moved online now have a means of growing geographically that does not involve the cost of opening new drop-in centres, though overshadowing this are questions over whether, and in what shape, face-to-face provision will return. Caroline Hoffman is the clinical and research director at Breast Cancer Haven, which has compressed five regional centres into one virtual operation, yet has seen participation in its support groups rise by a third after switching to Zoom. She says, of coming out of lockdown, "I'd like to think that we can develop our live online services to expand to a wider area, but also keep some face-to-face presence."
Maggie's has already reopened for one-to-one appointments and plans to restart work in small groups, as soon as it is safe to do so. Others are more cautious. Chris Curtis, chief executive of The Swallows, a head and neck cancer support group, says: "We can't look to restart face-to-face meetings until the new year, due to the current lockdown restrictions and because the people we support are highly vulnerable."
Back in Chandler's Ford, Gibbons is clear that even after lockdown, her life has changed. "When coronavirus goes, life isn't going to be all rosy, and we're back to normal," she says. Although she looks forward to her virtual catch-ups and counselling, she dislikes the "whispery" necessity of checking that her children are out of earshot. And she is looking forward to having some face-to-face support again. As much as there are online groups, she says, "there's an immense comfort in just sitting with someone who has even an inkling of knowing how that feels."