England's test-and-trace system not fit for purpose, say scientists
Independent Sage calls for local-first approach, including support for those in isolation
The UK government's testing and contact-tracing system is not fit for purpose and will not be able to keep coronavirus in check as other countries have done, according to an independent group of scientists.
The former government chief scientific adviser Sir David King, who now leads the Independent Sage group, is calling for a new approach, warning that the measures in place in England will not be enough to pick up 80% of the contacts of people with the virus, which they say is needed to prevent the infection rate rising.
"The government has placed huge emphasis on their test, track and trace system in recent weeks, even labelling it 'world-beating'. It is clear from our research that this simply isn't the case – indeed, the system as it stands is not fit for purpose," King said.
"This is the critical moment for the government to act now or risk further spikes. We believe that a new approach is required, one that moves away from a centralised system that utilises a local-first approach. We are calling on the government to urgently rethink their course to ensure that we have a system in place that will help and not hinder the country's recovery."
Independent Sage is a group of 12 leading scientistswho have been critical of the government's handling of the pandemic. It was set up partly in response to a lack of transparency around the government's Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage). The membership of Sage and minutes and documents relating to its meetings have since been published.
The independent group's report points out that the epidemic is still growing in some parts of the country, such as north-west England. They say erosion of trust in the government in recent weeks will make it less likely that people will comply if they are called by contact-tracers and told they must self-isolate.
"If Covid‐19 is to be eliminated, as New Zealand has shown is possible, then at least 80% of all close contacts of those with Covid‐19 infection (the index case) must remain isolated for 14 days so that they are unable to pass on infection to others. This is clearly not happening," says the report.
It argues for a more comprehensive system than just test and trace. The report says it should be "find, test, trace, isolate and support". Speed is vital: the scientists point out that Sage itself advised that the aim should be to isolate as many contacts as possible within 48 hours.
Test results should be available within 24 hours, says Independent Sage. Those who are isolated should have financial support and accommodation provided if they need it. And the scientists say the system depends on a high level of trust and should be run by the local authority directors of public health who know their communities.