Study finds half of 16- to 24-year-olds hit by 'lockdown loneliness'
The equivalent of 7.4 million people across Great Britain say wellbeing has been affected
Younger people are more likely to have experienced loneliness than older people during lockdown, according to research by the Office for National Statistics (ONS).
People aged 16 to 24 were more than twice as likely (50.8%) to have experienced "lockdown loneliness" as those aged 55 to 69 (24.1%) , the survey of 5,260 adults in Great Britain found. The over-70s were no more likely than average to suffer this modern malady.
The equivalent of 7.4 million people across Great Britain said their wellbeing had been affected through feeling lonely in the previous seven days, the ONS found in its survey, carried out between 3 April and 3 May.
People who were married, cohabiting or in a civil partnership (both same- and opposite-sex) were less likely than average to report loneliness, while those who either single, divorced or separated were more likely.
Those feeling lonely were disproportionately likely to say they felt unsafe or very unsafe in their home –a potential indicator of domestic abuse or concerns about the community, the ONS said.
Those who live in rented accommodation were more lonely than homeowners –a fact the ONS suggests might be due to the fact rented properties are less likely to have a garden. Nearly a quarter (24%) of people in rented homes in England said they had no access to a garden, compared with 4% of those in owned homes.
Of those feelinglonely"often or always", only seven in 10 agreed or strongly agreed that they had people who would be there for them. This compared with the British average of nine in 10 adults.
Overall, though, the survey found no significant change in the proportion of people who said they often or always felt alone – 5%, equivalent to about 2.6 million people.
"The Office for National Statistics has been researching people's wellbeing for nearly a decade, providing a different perspective on how our country is doing, and on social inequalities. Lockdown affected everyone, but responses differed," said Dawn Snape, of the ONS.
"During that first month, the equivalent of 7.4 million people said their wellbeing was affected through feeling lonely. Lonely people were more likely than others to be struggling to find things to help them cope and were also less likely to feel they had support networks to fall back on."