Limited reopening of places of worship in England planned for 15 June
Weddings and group worship not yet allowed but praying will be, subject to distancing rules
Churches and other places of worship in England are set to open for private prayer from 15 June, the government has announced.
Individuals are expected to be able to "reflect and pray" while adhering to physical distancing rules – but worship groups, weddings and other services will still not be permitted.
Downing Street said the changes would only be made if the government's five tests for easing lockdown are met.
Places of worship come under step three of the government's road map to lift restrictions, and are not due to fully reopen until at least 4 July.
Ministers had been warned that worshippers felt "disappointment and hurt" at not being able to visit places of worship despite some shops being reopened.
A government taskforce with faith leaders was launched last month to develop a plan to enable the phased and safe reopening of religious buildings.
The Church of England closed all its buildings on 24 March, meaning funerals could only take place at crematoriums or the graveside. Clergy were encouraged to live-stream worship from their own homes.
The communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, said: "Ensuring places of worship can open again, beginning with private prayer by individuals has been my priority. Their contribution to the common good of our country is clear, as places of solace, comfort, stability and dignity. And the need for them is all the greater as we weather the uncertainties of the pandemic.
"I'm pleased the prime minister has announced that this is expected to happen from 15 June. As communities secretary, I have worked with faith leaders and representatives to prepare guidance that ensures this can be done safely.
"People of all faiths have shown enormous patience and forbearance, unable to mark Easter, Passover, Ramadan or Vaisakhi with friends and family in the traditional way.
"As we control the virus, we are now able to move forwards with a limited but important return to houses of worship."
A Number 10 spokeswoman added: "The prime minister recognises how important it is, at this unprecedented time, for people to have the space to reflect and pray, to connect with their faith, and to be able to mourn for their loved ones.
"The PM is so grateful to people of all faiths and none, who have followed the social distancing guidelines, and in doing so, protected their communities.
"We plan to open up places of worship for individual prayer in a safe, Covid-secure way that does not risk further transmission."
This article was amended on 7 June 2020. The changes apply to England only, not UK as we said in the headline to an earlier version.