Test-and-trace system is not fit for purpose
Far from being world-beating, Dr Nigel Speight's experience of self-testing was one of delay and wasted resources, Rachel White has no confidence in her results, a visit to a drive-in centre left Graham Stevens shocked and angry, and Andrew Sayers says we should be alert to privatisation of the NHS
The prime minister has claimed the track, test and trace system is "world-beating" (Editorial, 3 June). This is so far from reality as to be laughable.
Last week, on Thursday 28 May, my wife developed symptoms. I rang for a test the same day. I was told to go online and book a courier to deliver the test materials, only this would not be delivered until Friday. The courier duly arrived and promptly departed. I then had to go back online to book another courier to pick up the test, and this could not take place until Saturday. I performed the test and the courier picked it up. The system promised a result in two to three days but we only received the result on Wednesday 3 June, six days after my first contact.
Such a system is absolutely useless for public health purposes, as numerous contacts could have infected others in the intervening six days. This system is not fit for purpose, and is the result of the government having ignored local public health services, opting instead for a complicated and centralised system, contracted out to a series of private operatives such as Serco, G4S, Randox and Amazon.
Had this not been the policy, we could indeed have had a world-beating system based on our local NHS public health structure. In this system I would have been able to phone on the Thursday, a local NHS worker could have come out the same day, done the test, taken it to our local hospital lab one mile away, and we could have had the result phoned through and advice given within 12 to 24 hours. One shudders to think of the public money wasted on the current system. It is not surprising that public confidence in the government's handling of this pandemic is dwindling.Dr Nigel SpeightDurham
I have been self-reporting on the Covid-19 Zoe app and was asked to get a test after reporting mild fatigue and a rash on my big toe.
Booking a test was straightforward on gov.uk. I went to the regional testing centre in Hanley. The army personnel were efficient. However, everyone is required to use a test kit themselves. I was unsure that I could swab my tonsils accurately. I asked for help and was told that there was no one medically trained at the site to assist. I tried. Instructions are clear that the swab must not touch tongue, teeth, cheeks or gums.
I have no confidence in the test result. My husband and I will self-isolate for seven days anyway. We must have widespread testing to identify the spread of this new disease and to prevent further spread. Testing must be reliable, but I believe most people will not swab correctly.
Money is spent on gov.uk, the hire of a car park, portable cabins, PPE equipment, gazebos, army and other personnel, testing kits and laboratory services – all for a test that is unreliable. The inaccuracy should be minimised by having a medically trained person to use the swab. Rachel WhiteAlsager, Cheshire
My partner and I returned from the test centre in Brighton shocked and angry, not because of delay or error (Report, 28 April), but because of the rude, threatening and disrespectful behaviour of some staff members. My partner and I are of pensionable age.
Having failed to see any signage instructing me otherwise, I took four photographs of the stadium car park, where I ordinarily travel to enjoy football. I was then told this was forbidden on "a government site" and I was happy to delete them. This precipitated a tirade from one of those present, who impatiently repeated the message and interrupted all attempts to clarify and explain. She then spoke to my partner, who assured her that she had not used her mobile, was feeling unwell (hence our visit), and was very anxious about the test. She shouted at my partner, who was taking time to access her phone because she was wearing plastic gloves, and told her that she was giving her "a final warning", after which she would "void the test".
After she was satisfied that both our phones were free of any photos of the car park, we were able to proceed with self-testing. We then drove to hand in our test samples, only to be stopped by five security staff, one of whom demanded to see the deleted photos file on our phones, even though these had already been checked. We were then allowed to leave. The experience was more redolent of a visit to a cold war security border than to a Department of Health and Social Care facility.Graham StevensCrowborough, East Sussex
So according to Serco's CEO, its contract for contact tracing "will go a long way in cementing the position of the private sector companies in the public sector supply chain" (NHS test-and-trace system 'not fully operational until September, 4 June). This confirms what many of us already suspected: the pandemic is being used by the government to accelerate the ongoing privatisation of the NHS, as the Guardian warned a month ago (UK government 'using pandemic to transfer NHS duties to private sector', 4 May). Stay alert! Protect the NHS from the Tories!Andrew SayerLancaster
Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com
Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters