Extra 10,000 dementia deaths in England and Wales in April
People with dementia 'just switching off' amid reduced medical care and family visits
There were almost 10,000 unexplained extra deaths among people with dementia in England and Wales in April, according to official figures that have prompted alarm about the severe impact of social isolation on people with the condition.
The data, from the Office for National Statistics, reveals that, beyond deaths directly linked to Covid-19, there were 83% more deaths from dementia than usual in April, with charities warning that a reduction in essential medical care and family visits were taking a devastating toll.
"It's horrendous that people with dementia have been dying in their thousands," said Kate Lee, chief executive officer at Alzheimer's Society. "We've already seen the devastating effect of coronavirus on people with dementia who catch it, but our [research] reveals that the threat of the virus extends far beyond that."
A survey of 128 care homes by Alzheimer's Society reveals that 79% report that lack of social contact is causing a deterioration in the health and wellbeing of their residents with dementia. Relatives of those with dementia in care homes have spoken of their loved ones feeling confused and abandoned, stopping eating and losing the ability to speak. One man told the charity he was "really fearful my wife won't recognise me at the end of this".
A quarter of those who have died with coronavirus have also had dementia, making it the most common pre-existing condition for deaths, along with diabetes. Aside from coronavirus, in April there were a further 9,429 deaths from dementia and Alzheimer'sdisease alone in England and 462 in Wales.That number is 83% higher than usual in England, and 54% higher in Wales.
The charity thinks the increased numbers of deaths from dementia are resulting partly from increased cognitive impairment caused by isolation, the reduction in essential care as family carers cannot visit, and the onset of depression as people with dementia do not understand why loved ones are no longer visiting, causing them to lose skills and independence, such as the ability to speak or even stopping eating and drinking.
Another factor may be interruptions to usual health services, with more than three-quarters of care homes reporting that GPs have been reluctant to visit residents.
Gavin Terry, head of policy at Alzheimer's Society, said that isolation can be devastating as family members and friends often play a crucial role in maintaining the health of people with dementia by bringing them meals, taking them out regularly to exercise and keeping people socially engaged. Withdrawing this support can cause people to rapidly go downhill, he said. "We're hearing that some people are 'just giving up' or 'switching off' and not eating or drinking," he said.
"We have to stem the dreadful loss of life for those who were neglected at the start of this crisis – with a threadbare social care system already on its knees, ill-equipped to protect them," said Lee.
Trevor Salomon, 67, whose wife Yvonne, 64, is in a care home in London and was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease when she was 57, said that the pandemic has led to dramatic changes in his wife's care. "The familiar faces of family and friends are gone, and carers are behind masks and can't touch or comfort the residents," he said. "Yvonne has lost her sparkle, she's in a world she doesn't understand. The staff at the care home are doing an amazing job looking after the residents, but we've only got video calls to keep in touch, and Yvonne doesn't always understand them. If lockdown continues, I'm really fearful my wife won't be able to recognise me at the end of all this."
Alzheimer's Society is calling for regular screening to be urgently introduced for care home staff and residents, which it says would both help protect against the spread of infection, but also allow visits to be safely reintroduced. The government said last month that all care home staff and residents in England would be tested for the virus by early June but it is unclear how much progress has been made towards this goal and how frequently tests will be repeated.
Samantha Benham-Hermetz, director of policy and public affairs at Alzheimer's Research UK, said the ONS data reveals a shocking increase in the number of people dying from dementia. "In the midst of this pandemic, we cannot afford to ignore the devastating impact dementia is continuing to have across our society," she said.
"Every day it's becoming clearer that those living with the condition are also disproportionately affected by Covid-19," she added. "Not only are people with dementia vulnerable to the virus itself, but the circumstances of social distancing are exacerbating existing challenging dementia symptoms and compounding the impact of the condition."