Coronavirus latest: at a glance 4 June
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
A $2bn (£1.5bn) fund aimed at ensuring that poorer countries can access doses of a potential coronavirus vaccine has been unveiled at a virtual summit hosted by the UK.
The announcement was made at the third Gavi vaccine alliance replenishment summit, a virtual pledging event that raised $8.8bn, above the target of $7.6bn, to immunise 300 million children against infectious diseases like polio, diphtheria and measles within five years.
Grant Shapps, the UK's transport secretary, has announced that face coverings will be mandatory on public transport in England from 15 June.
He added that people can be refused permission to travel if they do not comply and could be fined.
The World Health Organization's director for Africa, Dr Matshidiso Moeti, has said current statistics for the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the continent are broadly accurate, amid concerns that low levels of testing, poor infrastructure and a lack of cooperation from some governments may have been disguising the true extent of the disease's spread.
There are around 162,622 confirmed cases in Africa, with 4,604 deaths.
Another 1.9 million people filed for unemployment benefits in the United States last week as the total number of claims passed 42 million since the coronavirus pandemic hit.
The pace of layoffs has slowed dramatically from its peak of 6.6m a week at the start of April, as states begin to relax quarantine orders, and last week was the ninth consecutive week of declines in new claims. But the scale of layoffs remains high.
Health authorities in Iran have reported 3,574 new cases of coronavirus, the highest daily count since the outbreak began in the country in February.
The previous high of 3,186, recorded on 30 March, was surpassed on the fourth consecutive day of daily caseloads that have topped 3,000.
Authorities in France have cancelled the 2020 Bastille Day military parade due to physical distancing requirements.
Rather than the traditional march of soldiers and military hardware down the Champs-Elysees on 14 July, there will be a smaller ceremony at the Place de la Concorde, the presidency said.
Spain wants to welcome British tourists back as soon as its airports reopen to foreign visitors on 1 July, but has warned much will depend on the UK's 14-day coronavirus quarantine for those returning from abroad and on the British authorities rescinding advice on non-essential foreign travel.
Spain's tourism minister, María Reyes Maroto, said the country will begin hosting foreign visitors from 22 June, when the current state of emergency ends and land borders with France and Portugal reopen.
Restrictions on domestic travel will be eased in Sweden from 13 June, the prime minister, Stefan Löfven, has said, despite signs that coronavirus infections are increasing in parts of the country.
With the number of deaths and people treated at intensive care falling, Löfven said that Swedes who were symptom-free could now plan visits to their summer cottages or relatives in other parts of the country.
Activists in Norway have been refused permission to hold solidarity rallies in support of protests in the US over the police killing of George Floyd, because of fears of the spread of coronavirus.
Mohamed Awil, the president of the African student association UiO, said rallies had been planned in Oslo, Bergen and Trondheim, but local authorities said they could not allow more than 50 people to gather in one place without a dispensation from the Norwegian Institute of Public Health.
New Zealand has a date for when it will achieve its goal of elimination of Covid-19: 15 June.
On Thursday, health officials announced they had found no new cases of the virus for the 13th straight day, from thousands of tests.