MPs shielding from Covid-19 allowed proxy vote in Johnson U-turn
Move follows outcry over treatment of parliamentarians with medical conditions
Boris Johnson has announced a government U-turn to allow MPs who are shielding to vote by proxy following an outcry over the treatment of parliamentarians with medical conditions or those who are looking after vulnerable loved ones during the coronavirus pandemic.
It follows a government move to drop the use of virtual measures in the Commons, as critics including 31 Conservative MPs voted to keep remote tools in place.
On Tuesday, Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the house, declined to endorse a proxy vote system, instead saying that vulnerable MPs could be paired. The government voted down virtual measures and was ridiculed over the "socially distanced conga" of politicians that snaked around parliament waiting to vote.
At prime minister's questions, Johnson said MPs who were vulnerable would be able to vote remotely.
Sir Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, told the prime minster that the scenes of MPs either queuing to vote or unable to vote on Tuesday were shameful.
"If any other employer acted like this it would be a clear and obvious case of indirect discrimination under the Equalities Act," he said.
Johnson replied: 'I do not think it's unreasonable that we should ask parliamentarians to come back to this place and do their job for the people of this country.
"I know it is difficult and I apologise to all of those who are shielding or they are elderly. They should be able to vote by proxy," he said.
At present, pregnant MPs and those who are on maternity or paternity leave are allowed to use colleagues as proxy votes under reforms introduced in 2019.
Robert Halfon, the chair of the education select committee, who is shielding, welcomed the move. "The good news is that the PM @BorisJohnson has just announced will allow #COVID19 affected MPs to vote via proxy," he wrote on Twitter.
Rees-Mogg's office confirmed that a motion extending proxy voting arrangements to MPs who are shielding and those over the age of 70 will be tabled for Thursday.
Karen Bradley, the chair of the procedures committee, and Labour's Chris Bryant are expected to table amendments on Tuesday to the motion to allow for parts of the so-called "hybrid proceedings" to continue.
This would mean any MPs who cannot get to the Commons during the pandemic can take part in debates and committees over Zoom and vote online – as they have done since the middle of April.
Bradley on Tuesday put forward an amendment to the government's plan to allow remote voting. Despite getting the support of 31 Tory MPs – including select committee chairs including Tom Tugendhat and Greg Clark – it lost by 37 votes.