Primark plans to reopen all 153 stores in England on 15 June
Clothing retailer will introduce Covid-19 physical-distancing protocols and other measures
The clothing retailer Primark plans to reopen all 153 of its English stores on 15 June, as non-essential retailers across England began coming out of lockdown on Monday.
Car showrooms and outdoor markets were among the retail businesses allowed to open on Monday in England, as the government seeks to allow the economy to restart, albeit with physical-distancing rules.
Non-essential retailers have been closed across the UK since 23 March, when the lockdown to limit the spread of coronavirus started, but retailers have lobbied to reopen as the shutdown has threatened the survival of many businesses. Debenhams, Monsoon and French Connection are among the retailers that have closed branches or warned they are close to collapse.
Primark, owned by the Associated British Foods (ABF) conglomerate, previously disclosed that it lost £650m in sales for every month that all stores were closed.
The fast fashion retailer will introduce physical-distancing protocols in its stores, as well as hand-sanitiser stations, perspex screens at tills and additional cleaning of high-frequency touch points. Changing rooms in the UK will remain closed and all employees will also be offered personal protection, including masks and gloves, it said.
Primark has already reopened 112 stores outside the UK, from Germany to Spain and the Netherlands, representing just over a third of its total selling space. It said trading in its reopened stores "has been both reassuring and encouraging, with customer queues outside most stores and, once in store, spending on larger basket sizes".
In April the UK government set out these five tests it said had to be met before they would consider easing coronavirus lockdown restrictions:
However, like-for-like sales are down in reopened stores, with sales at four city centre stores below 50% of last year's figure.
John Bason, the finance director of ABF, said early sales number were surprisingly good given that people were still worried about going out, tourism was on hold, many were still working from home or furloughed and there was little call to dress up for special occasions.
"People have come back to us," Bason said. "This is not the end [of lockdown]. This is the beginning of the second phase. A number of things that have stopped for lockdown will increasingly come back. Sales in certain stores could change quite a lot."
He admitted that profitability and sales in large city centre stores, which are more affected by tourism and trade from office workers, were likely to be hit in coming months but said some regional stores could trade much more strongly.
Primark is sufficiently confident to have placed more than £500m in orders for autumn and winter fashions with suppliers. "That is not tokenism," Bason said.
The chain has been particularly badly hit by the crisis because of it does not sellonline, meaning it has built up a huge volume of unsold clothes, despite the controversial cancellation of all orders from suppliers for delivery after 17 April. In early May, as the first stores in Austria and the Netherlands reopened, it had £1.9bn in unsold stock or orders, more than double the normal amount.
The company will hold back some of the unsold stock until summer 2021, while it plans to gradually work through the excess of non-seasonal basic clothing, such as underwear, without the need for the heavy discounting seen at other retailers such as Marks &amp; Spencer.
Primark said it had paid £10m to help low-paid workers in its supply chain in countries such as Bangladesh. The cancellation of orders by Primark and other retailers meant more than a million workers were sent home without pay.
Primark, which has furloughed staff and cut pay, said it had reduced its overhead spending by 50% in April and May.