Warm UK weather to continue into next week after sunniest spring on record
Crowds flock to beaches and beauty spots ahead of lockdown easing while Met Office expects to confirm the driest May for 124 years
Coronavirus latest updates
Crowds flock to beaches and beauty spots ahead of lockdown easing while Met Office expects to confirm the driest May for 124 years
Coronavirus latest updates
The weekend's sunny weather, which saw crowds of people flock to beaches and beauty spots across the UK as lockdown restrictions began to be eased, will continue into the beginning of next week, forecasters said.
Britons enjoyed temperatures of up to 28C (82.4F) and the nation recorded its sunniest spring since records began in 1929.
The Met Office recorded more than 573 hours of sunshine between 1 March and 27 May, beating the previous record of 555.3 hours which was set in 1948.
It is also expected to be the driest May for 124 years, with official figures on rainfall to be published on Monday. It follows a Met Office warning last week that the human fingerprint on climate change was unmistakable.
But the weather sent people flocking outside and emergency services attended incidents involving water, fires and littering, despite warnings being issued to the public.
The high temperatures will remain until the middle of the week, when the weather will become more unsettled.
Marco Petagna, a meteorologist with the Met Office, said the west of England could enjoy highs of around 27C (80.6F) on Monday, while the south could see the hottest temperatures of the year so far on Tuesday at up to 29C (84.2F).
But the unseasonably warm period will give way to more changeable weather just days after the relaxation of lockdown measures, allowing socially distanced groups of up to six people to meet outside in England, on Monday.
In Scotland, people from one household have been able to meet with another household outdoors since Friday, while in Wales the change comes on Monday. Groups of six are already allowed to meet outdoors in Northern Ireland.
Petagna said: "The sunny weather will certainly continue for a couple more days but from Tuesday we are starting to see some more unsettled weather across Scotland and the gradual trend will be turning cooler across the UK from Wednesday onwards."
The forecaster said northerly winds will bring cooler air and some areas in the south of England could experience thundery showers.
People across England took advantage of the hot weather over the weekend to visit beaches and beauty spots, despite some authorities urging the public to stay away. Nancy Platts, leader of Brighton and Hove City Council, asked people not to visit the area on Sunday and called on the government for more powers to implement a local lockdown.
On Saturday, crowds of people had to be evacuated from the beach and surrounding cliffs at Durdle Door, in Dorset, when three tombstoners were injured after jumping from a 200ft sea arch.
Scores of people defied attempts to close the beach on Sunday, with people being encouraged by crowds to jump from the same arch.
In Lancashire, one man died and two others were rescued and taken to hospital for treatment after a boat sank about a mile off the coast at Fleetwood on Sunday morning.
Authorities across the country urged people to stay away from open water, avoid lighting barbecues or fires and take litter home, as they reported having to fight fires and clear up rubbish left behind by visitors.
More than 100 firefighters in the north-west battled to contain separate blazes as a result of the hot weather, with one moorland fire, covering 5km of land in Darwen, thought to have been started by a disposable barbecue.
A tweet by North York Moors National Park on Sunday said: "Our rangers spent this morning at a beauty spot collecting 20 bags of rubbish, including nappies, socks, shoes, towels, chairs, gas canisters, BBQs, beer bottles, food and broken glass.
"Please do your bit and take your litter home."
Rochdale Council tweeted that local beauty spots had "taken a hammering" from visitors and West Midlands Fire Service reported that firefighters spent the morning clearing up litter at Cannon Hill Park.
Scots flocked to beaches on the west and east coasts to enjoy the fine weather. Golf courses have also been open since Friday.