The pupside: why dogs are the real winners in lockdown
The Upside roundup looks at pets, pedestrians and policing in our weekly quest for optimism and hope
OK, I'll confess. We got a dog. Cute little Upside lockdown thing, apart from his backside, which is definitely a downside when he doesn't go outside.
But it did get me thinking: everyone seems happier since he arrived. Is that a thing, the pupside if you will? Are dogs really good for you? Many people seem to think so, and rising prices in the UK recently surely indicate a surge in demand.
Turns out there is plenty of research on this, though not surprisingly it's nuanced and not totally conclusive. Last summer I heard the US academic Stephen Porges talk about the mammalian need for co-regulation, an animal ability to soothe one another through interaction.
Perhaps this is why the pup is making us all feel a little better in a way that Kevin the goldfish never could. Oh the irony: for years and years I couldn't get rid of the big black dog. Turns out all I needed was a little white one.
Elsewhere on the (P)Upside this week …
A new way to farm. Four-minute read
Heroes of lockdown, part 74: the bicycle purveyors. Two-minute read
We're glad it's all over: New Zealand lifts Covid-19 restrictions and gets back to life. Three-minute read
"Pedestrians have more space than bikes, and bikes have more space than cars." The post-Covid city we want. Four-minute read
What's that tree? Now, app can tell you the answer Two-minute leaf through
More gratuitous listicles: readers' favourite number ones. Three minutes of perfect pop
Japan had zero Covid-19 deaths one day last week – the first time this has happened for three months. On the same day, the US had fewer deaths than at any point since late March. Australia looks set within weeks to join New Zealand in the small group of truly post-Covid-19 nations.
Meanwhile, Imperial College has published analysis positing that Europe's lockdown saved 3.1 million lives in just six weeks.
This long but important piece looks at how police training might prevent the next George Floyd from happening.
While on the theme of lockdown and loneliness, this timely piece in Scientific American investigates why we crave company.
The UK's latest walking fundraiser is in many ways even more remarkable than Tom Moore.
And this, sent in by Richie Meneses, is quite cute: a map showing instances of good news about Covid-19, built by Mark Lawton in Oregon.
Strangely we had another little pulse of favourite words in languages from around the world, two years after we published this piece. Do keep them coming…
Bob Preece gave us our first Finnish entry, a word meaning to get drunk at home in your underwear with no intention of going out
I cannot help but feel you missed a trick when omitting the Finnish word Kalsarikannit from your list - I am sure I am not alone in mastering its application - along with many other millions during the lockdown.
Apparently, Finnish government PR types have even created an emoji for the term
Gill Berson has another word for our messed-up times.
My favourite word in modern Hebrew is balagan. It describes a kind of chaos or mess and aptly describes this government's approach to the current pandemic....what a balagan!
Geri Blake brings us back to English, and an invention of Edgar Allan Poe.
Tintinnabulation: the lingering sound of a fading bell. I have loved this word for years, but it's hard to work it into a conversation.
Yes I agree – tintinnabulation is hard to work into a conversation. Oh – we just did.
Finally, back to community spirit, and Sarah Battarbee with a lovely example from the Peak District.
I work in a community shop which just sort of created a support networkto meet the needs of those who wanted help, very fast and almost out of thin air.It was based aroundour community shop, which is a grand little thing but that's another story.Then an enterprisingchap from another village got a group of us who were central to our own village efforts together, to find out what each were doing and how we could share and benefit.That group has solidified and now we are looking to support local businesses post-Covid with a virtual supermarket, doing away with supermarket trips and vans and running deliveries witha solarpowered van.
There were elements of this community, grass roots peer-led capacity before Covid but once that was with us, it has been quite amazing what a group of peoplecan do.Our village has over 80 volunteers on its WhatsApp group, the village next door has 250.Everyone wants to help.The group is looking to tap that and keep it beyond the end of Covid.I expect there are many many similar examples around the country.I hope you might be able to report back on some of them, it would be fascinating.
At our livestream event last Friday which considered the newfound community spirit conjured up during the pandemic. In a straw poll of hundreds of attendees we asked whether people thought it would continue beyond the end of Covid-19 – and 74% predicted that it would. On that note…