'Adapt and overcome': class of 2020 inherits worst labor market since the Great Depression
Ceremonies have been cancelled and internships have vanished as a new round of graduates step into a world hobbled by the pandemic
Monique Guerra will graduate from the University of California, Riverside, this week with a double major in education and Spanish. But, like so many other students in their final year of study, she hasn't figured out what happens next.
The class of 2020 is on a rollercoaster ride, whiplashed by Covid-19's carnage across the United States. Dozens of institutions have cancelled or postponed in-person graduation ceremonies in the name of public health. And graduates such as Guerra are facing the daunting prospect of having to elbow their way into the worst labor market since the Great Depression, after more than 40 million people filed unemployment claims since mid-March.
"It's really tough right now," Guerra said. "I don't know what's gonna happen. And it's ironic because I think my number one fear in life is uncertainty."
As the American economy flounders, opportunities that existed mere months ago have all but vanished. On Glassdoor, internship openings have dropped across the board, and have plummeted in hard-hit industries such as travel and tourism. According to a recent survey by job-search site Handshake, 30% of juniors and seniors they polled had lost their summer internships after future employers reneged on offers. And many young people who were banking on internships are now out of a paycheck, as their cancelled programs are not compensating them at all.
For the lucky students who already have full-time job offers that have survived the pandemic, some start dates have been pushed back for months. For those who are still searching, hiring freezes are sabotaging what could have been successful applications.
"Compared to students who graduated a few years ago, there's no doubt that the newly graduated are gonna have a very different experience, and it'll take them longer to get started in the labor market," said Cecilia E Rouse, dean of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University.
One of the aftershocks from the US's last economic nosedive, the Great Recession of 2008-2009, was that recent college graduates "struggled to find jobs, let alone jobs that utilized their degrees", a 2015 report from the New York Federal Reserve bank found. Pummeled by their harrowing financial reality, millennials have had to put myriad life decisions on hold, from having kids to buying houses, as they have played catchup in a market that was stacked against them from the start.
This time around, the pandemic has further complicated the downturn as a new generation of graduates enter the workforce.
"If this were just an economic crisis in usual times, the economy would be in charge. Here, it's the virus that's in charge," Rouse said. "It's our ability to really combat the virus. And there's so much uncertainty there."
Even as stay-at-home orders have lifted across the US in recent weeks, millions remain out of work as businesses grasp for a new normal.
Max Katz-Balmes, who majored in environmental studies and economics at Swarthmore College in Pennsylvania, had lined up a paid position directing an outdoor summer camp for kids in California, until it was cancelled. Now, he's searching for urban environmental work.
"All of my friends who didn't have jobs going into the pandemic are still unemployed," he said. "It's definitely not just me."
Katz-Balmes, who worked as a research fellow for his college, tried to file for unemployment in Pennsylvania. It took about a month to hear anything; then, he had to submit his application again because he messed up the first time. He is waiting for a response.
"I don't want to have to take out loans or rely on my parents," he said. "The fear of not knowing whether or not I have this unemployment support, or what the world will look like in a couple years, or if jobs will be available for my classmates or whatever, those uncertainties definitely are stressful."
Gabriel Lara, who just earned his degree from Chicago-Kent College of Law, is working remotely as a law clerk, and he already has an offer to be a full-time attorney. But that role, which was supposed to begin in September, has now been postponed until January.
"It's definitely made me have to figure out how to survive on savings for more time," Lara said.
High school graduates are also having to adapt. Jayde Alioto, who is graduating from Forest high school in Florida this month, said she tried to file for unemployment multiple times after being laid off as a hotel server and losing catering gigs. But she couldn't access the website because, she thinks, so many others were also trying to claim benefits.
Alioto was unemployed for about six weeks but now works at a local restaurant as she makes plans to take a course in phlebotomy.
"I've pretty much been taking stuff week by week," she said. "Because with everything going on, you don't know what's gonna happen."
Even graduates in "essential" professions are struggling to drum up work. Elissa Gibbons just earned her associate degree in nursing from Austin Community College in Texas, and before spring break she applied to pediatric positions at hospitals. Soon after, she started getting emails saying the facilities were no longer hiring.
"I'm a big believer in everything happens for a reason, and so we shall see what happens," she said. "What comes from all this."
Experts voiced empathy for all graduates but said they expected the worst of the financial crisis to fall on people who generally didn't have the luxury of a college degree, as it did following the last financial crisis. Manufacturing, services and tourism are expected to disproportionately struggle.
"Our concern is primarily with those who have been educated with narrow technical training and the promise of an immediate job," said Lynn Pasquerella, president of the Association of American Colleges and Universities.
Taytum McGill, who studied salon and spa management at Northeast Alabama Community College, had been saving up to attend eyelash certifications, color correction trainings and spray tan classes. Suddenly, they have all been cancelled. The 19-year-old is leaning on two jobs right now – one at her alma mater, the other at a local restaurant – but she still can't afford to live independent from her parents.
Regardless, she is confident in her career outlook, once she lands an interview and starts working in a salon.
"I don't know if it'll ever go back to normal. I'm very hopeful that it will. But even if it doesn't, I feel like I could still build clientele that would help me in the future," McGill said.
Others are more pessimistic. When Abigail Randall, a senior at the University of Washington, searches for work in her wheelhouse – public relations, creative film and marketing – so many of the positions are either part-time internships or unpaid roles. She tried applying to work in a credit union's call center, but within an hour and a half, she got a rejection email.
"It's hard to put into words. It feels like I'm being asked to make yet another impossible series of choices," she said.
Marianne Wanamaker, an associate professor of economics at the University of Tennessee, warned that in this inhospitable economy, students shouldn't just wait around for their dream jobs. Once the downturn eases, they will be able to switch roles, but "it's easier to get a job when you already have a job".
Young people who can't find a paid internship or job right now should volunteer if they can, or enroll in some kind of online training, Pasquerella suggested.
"The important part is creating a narrative between their education, what they're doing now for personal and professional development and what employers are seeking," she said.
The landscape may be grim, but it isn't completely barren of opportunity, experts suggested. Amanda Sloat, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, listed a slew of virtual internships and online volunteer ideas that recent graduates can take up while they search for jobs.
"This is just a much earlier example of life being very unpredictable and forcing students to be much more flexible, and also developing a real sense of resilience and ability to withstand the uncertainty," said Sloat. "And to adapt, and to think creatively."
Back in California, Guerra is keeping her options open. She has jumped on a lot of phone interviews, but she is not finding many opportunities in her fields of interest: education and policy reform. She has read articles claiming that now is the time to go back to school, and she is keen on the idea – but first, she needs a job to pay her rent.
"That should be, like, our slogan. 'Adapt and overcome, class of 2020'," Guerra said. "It's what we have to do."