An attentive prison nurse, a loving and devoted radiologist
We are documenting the lives of every US medical worker who dies helping patients during the pandemic. These are just a few of hundreds of cases
Lost on the frontline is a collaboration between the Guardian and Kaiser Health News that aims to document the lives of healthcare workers in the US who die from Covid-19, and to understand why so many are falling victim to the pandemic.
Each week, we're documenting new cases of healthcare workers who have died on the frontlines of the coronavirus pandemic. Here are their stories:
Occupation: Intensive care unit secretaryPlace of work: Kent hospital in Warwick, Rhode IslandDate of death: 29 April 2020
When things were slow at the hospital, Joan Swann would head down to the gift shop.
If someone was having a hard day – the security guard, the patient transporter, the barista – she might buy them a candle. Or charm bracelet. Or a Vera Bradley handbag.
"She brightened every situation," said Glenna Swann, her daughter. A former nurse, Joan coached trainees from behind the administrative desk. They called her an "icon" who was the reason many stayed on the intensive care unit.
When Joan was admitted to the hospital, those she had long cared for returned the favor. Her isolation room was adorned with blue hearts, and following her intubation, the nurses would FaceTime the family in. During quiet hours, they sat at her bedside.
The hospital did not respond to requests for comment.
After Joan died, the family found "thousands upon thousands" of unused greeting cards, sorted by occasion (weddings or Christmas) and emotion (sympathy or humor).
In the coming weeks, Joan's cherished grandson, Adam, will complete high school. Glenna is still choosing from among Joan's graduation cards for him.
– Eli Cahan
Occupation: Food service directorPlace of work: Queens Boulevard extended care facility in Queens, New YorkDate of death: 8 April 2020
Louis Torres went into the family business. He grew up adoring his mother's Filipino home cooking, so it was natural to channel his passion for food into comforting others. As a food service director at a nursing home in his native Queens, he could cook and work in healthcare as his mother did.
Feeling terrible on 30 March, Louis called his older brother, Lloyd, after work. "He was struggling to make it from the subway station," Lloyd said.
Louis lived with his mother, Lolita, 73, a retired hospital clerk. She also had severe Covid-19 symptoms.
By the next day, mother and son had been taken by ambulance to separate hospitals. In the chaos, Lloyd said it took an entire day of panicked calls to locate their mother, who had been taken to a Queens emergency room.
A few days later, Lloyd was able to pray the rosary with Lolita over the phone, and it seemed to calm her. Before they hung up, she asked that Lloyd take care of his brother. Louis made the same request about his mother before going on a ventilator.
"Their last words to me [were to] take care of each other, my God," Lloyd said.
On 7 April, Lolita died. Louis died the next day.
In the weeks since then, Lloyd was comforted by a dream.
"I woke up and smelled the frying of food," he said, invoking his mother's cooking. "That's how she showed her love."
– Kathleen Horan
Occupation: Licensed practical nursePlace of work: Pickaway correctional institution in Orient, OhioDate of death: 27 April 2020
When Tina Reeves visited her grandchildren, music would blast from the car. Wale's On Chill rang out: "Trying to hear all your problems, so I can lighten the load."
"She loved her music," said daughter Tiana Mohabir, "even though she had no rhythm for squat."
Reeves had an ear for other people's lives, though. Younger co-workers called her"Mother Advice", Mohabir said. In interactions with prisoners and officers alike "she always listened", Mohabir said, "and never judged".
She called her three daughters daily, "checking in on all of us", Mohabir added.
When Reeves started coughing in early April, Pickaway had already reported more than 1,500 cases of Covid-19.
"PPE [personal protective equipment] was, and continues to be, available to staff," a prison spokesperson said. The family said their mother did not have access to adequate PPE.
Reeves was hospitalized with Covid-19 on 13 April. She called her daughter to ask her to take care of paying her utility, insurance and cable bills. "I didn't think twice," Mohabir said, "because I didn't want them shut off when she got home."
Within 24 hours, Reeves was intubated.
– Eli Cahan
Occupation: Residential services supervisorPlace of work: Elisabeth Ludeman developmental center in Park Forest, IllinoisDate of death: 13 April 2020
Barbara Abernathy said she is trying to figure out what to do with six bins of toys her daughter bought for local children.
Growing up in Chatham, a middle-class neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago, Michelle Abernathy "was always trying to help somebody", Barbara said.
Michelle spent decades investigating child abuse and neglect while holding night jobs mentoring children.
A supervisor at a state-run facility for developmentally disabled adults, she bought clothes, games and snacks for residents. A staff memo lauded her "big heart and nurturing personality".
She fell ill on 28 March.By the time she was hospitalized on 6 April, she was too weak to walk.
Three other workers at the facility died of Covid-19. A spokesperson for the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, which represents workers at Ludeman, said that early in the pandemic staff had a "huge struggle" to get PPE.
The Illinois department of human services said it "can't say precisely" how workers contracted the virus and that it was working to provide sufficient PPE.
After long professing that she was too busy for marriage, Abernathy had recently become engaged to Torrence Jones, her colleague. She had planned to surprise her mother with the news but never had the chance.
– Mary Chris Jaklevic
Occupation:General surgeonPlace of work:Mount Sinai Queens, New YorkDate of death:18 April 2020
Barry Webber wanted to understand how thingsworked.That curiosity and drive motivated him to reconstruct an old Jeep, build a computer, take up rock climbing, and, of course, become a surgeon.
He pursued medicine when he realized he wasn't going to become a concert pianist, Harriet Clark Webber, his wife, said.
The two met when Harriet was a dancer with the American Ballet Theatre and Barry moonlit as a supernumerary — a non-dancing extra on stage — for the company. "He just wanted to be around the theater," she said.
Barry honed his surgery skills in a Brooklyn emergency room in the 1980s. "It was a rough time to be in an ER in Brooklyn," Harriet said. "He was treating a lot of gunshot wounds and trauma."
They married in 1996 and had two sons, now 22 and 20.
Like so many Americans, when Covid struck, the couple watchedContagion, a 2011 film about a pandemic. Barry said he had a bad feeling about it.
On 27 March, his fears were realized. He texted his wife:"I'm sick."
Harriet believes he contracted the virus at work before the hospital ordered the universal use of protective gear.
– Danielle Renwick
Occupation:Case ManagerPlace of work:Salvation Army in New Orleans, LouisianaDate of death:6 April 2020
A "natural New Orleanian", Jana Prince was bubbly and loving,her brother Paul Prince said.
Since high school, Jana knew she wanted to be a social worker.She grew up with cerebral palsy, wearing a leg brace and diligently practicing physical therapy so she could walk.Kids bullied her about her disability, but nothing would stop Jana from connecting with her community.
"She was trying to share her strength with other people, because she just didn't want to see people suffer," cousin Talisa Pace said."She really wanted to help the black community."
One day in mid-March, Jana had trouble breathing, Paul said. She was hospitalized for more than a week before she was intubated, and died the next day. The family said they did not know whether she was infected at work, especially given how early on in the pandemic she became infected; the Salvation Army declined to comment.
Her mother, Barbara Prince, died of the virus three days later.
The duo lived together and got on like Laverne and Shirley. They often took care of Paul's twin six-year-old boys. "I don't know how one would have survived without the other," Paul said.
Jana and Pace had dreamed of opening a coffee shop and counseling center. "She would have been the highlight of the whole place," Pace said.
– Theresa Gaffney, City University of New York
Occupation: RadiologistPlace of work: The Brooklyn hospital center in New YorkDate of death: 30 March 2020
By 10am on Sundays, David Wolin and his wife, Susan, would have completed one-quarter of the New York Times crossword puzzle.
When the grandchildren arrived, Wolin greeted them with bagels, lox, whitefish "and the best scrambled eggs in the entire world", said Helena Cawley, his daughter.
Wolin was "kind, simple, loving and devoted". A radiologist specializing in mammography, he was "committed to learning everything he could", Cawley said. "The latest medical journal was always on his nightstand."
He and Susan would skip off to their home upstate, where they might take out a rowboat, a bottle of chardonnay and a brick of Roquefort cheese under the stars. "All they needed was each other," Cawley said.
In late March, Wolin complained of "bad colds" but deferred testing. Brooklyn hospital was overwhelmed with Covid-19. A hospital spokesperson could not be reached for comment.
On 30 March, when Cawley couldn't reach her father, she called the doorman of his building. He reluctantly shared the news: Wolin had died overnight.
Susan was hospitalized that day with Covid-19 symptoms and died weeks later. "We're grateful in a way," Cawley said, "because we don't know how they could have lived without each other."
– Eli Cahan
Occupation:Nursing home bookkeeperEmployer and Location:Chelsea Place care center in Hartford, ConnecticutDate of death:29April 2020
Cassondra Diaz was a receptionist-turned-bookkeeper at Chelsea Place care center, a nursing home in her home town."She was my therapist, my fashion consultant, my hair designer," said her older sister, Takara Chenice. "I called her my 'big little sister'."
Loved ones described her as "an old soul", loyal to her family, including her husband, Sean Diaz. In their free time, the couple would hit the highway for long drives, venturing to parks, lakes and the beach.
Her family believes she contracted the virus at work. A spokesperson for Chelsea Place confirmed that the nursing home had Covid-19 cases among staff and patients. It said staff was provided with PPE. Despite wearing protective gear, removing her work clothes at the door and showering after work, Cassondra developed symptoms in mid-April.
On 29 April, she woke up having difficulty breathing and pain in her leg, said Sean, who called an ambulance. She died that day.
Sean keeps a photo of her in their car. "My six years with her were better than any lifetime I had before her," he said.
– Madeleine Kornfeld, City University of New York
Occupation: Hospital equipment coordinatorPlace of work: St. Elizabeth's medical center in Brighton, MassachusettsDate of death: 2 May 2020
David Ferranti was committed to his families – both at home and at work. In his job on the engineering unit, he was really part of every team in the hospital, wrote St Elizabeth's president, Harry Bane, in a note to employees. "He was always worried about 'his nurses' and 'his departments' having what they needed to best care for our patients."
Ferranti worked at the hospital for almost 42 years, "and he loved every day of it", said his father, Savino Ferranti. St Elizabeth's was treating many Covid-19 patients when David became infected with the virus, his father said, but it was impossible to say where he caught it. St Elizabeth's had no further comment about his case.
Ferranti was a family man "and the greatest son you can imagine", his father said. He had a wife, Susan, and a son, John.
Ferranti worked in his garden and enjoyed walks in nature. A history buff, he was born in Wiesbaden, Germany. His father, a descendant of Italian immigrants, served in the military there, where he met David's mother, Renate.
For his family, tragedy hit twice within weeks. David's aunt Ann Ferranti died of the disease a few weeks before David. The advice David would have given to anyone, said his father, "is to stay safe, whatever it takes".
– Katja Ridderbusch
Occupation:Clinical nurse managerPlace of work:Montefiore Mount Vernon hospital in Mount Vernon, New YorkDate of death:8 May 2020
Even as a girl, Kelly Mazzarella had her sights set on helping others. She turned this innate altruism into a 16-year career at a community-based teaching hospital.
Karen Jedlicka was blown away by the care her big sister showed every patient. "People would be going through the worst things in their lives and she was just there for them," Jedlicka said.
Mazzarella showed that same compassion with her husband, Ronnie Mazzarella, and daughters Hailey and Kristina. She never missed an opportunity to tell her daughters how proud they made her, Jedlicka said.
In July 2019, Mazzarella was diagnosed with lupus, an autoimmune disease that brought on painful bouts of swelling. She worked on and off through March, helping with the influx of Covid patients. She was diagnosed on 2 April and died five weeks later.Her employer did not respond to requests for comment.
Nicol Maursky, a lifelong friend, organized aGoFundMefor the family. A staggering outpouring has brought in close to $75,000.
"She just had such a love and a light that emanated from her," Jedlicka said. It's"very comforting to know everybody felt the same way that we did."
– Suzannah Cavanaugh,City University of New York
