As restaurants reopen, what will eating out be like in the age of coronavirus?
Three experts discuss what the future of dining could look like, including outdoor spaces and changes in procedures for staff
The US restaurant industry employs more than 15 million people and has an economic impact in the trillions, luring Americans to eat out about five times a week. Yet it is now facing near collapse, as coronavirus-related closures have led to plummeting profits and layoffs of an already vulnerable workforce.
As some restaurants begin to reopen, and patrons wonder if it's safe to eat out again, we asked three experts what the future of dining could look like.
What process are restaurants going through in preparation for reopening?
Jason Rose: Everyone's going to need to have an incredibly robust sanitation and safety system in place. Not even so much food safety – that's taken a backseat to people's safety, to the safety of your staff and the safety of your guests.
There's moving chairs around to create a floor plan that's safe. There's plastic barriers, creating one-lane aisles so that you minimize cross traffic. Limited seating and doing away with as many shared touch points – menus, getting your check, opening doors, the POS system, the salt and pepper shakers on the tables. Self-service? All gone. Pump ketchup and mustard, that's going to be all gone.
One restaurant recently added mannequins to their dining room to help space out their dining room. How might social distancing requirements affect a restaurant's bottom line?
Rose: The number of seats in a restaurant is one of the most foundational, fundamental metrics that's used in determining how much money the restaurant is able to generate. Cutting the number of seats in a restaurant is devastating, and this is why restaurants are pivoting almost instantaneously to see if they can go to a delivery model and pick-up model to create another revenue stream.
Max Hardy: I'm just always about what's beneficial for your bottom line. Mannequins don't really help the bottom line. [Instead] we'll rely heavily on reservations, so every two hours I'm hitting that minimum capacity, that capacity to make it beneficial, and I know that I won't be over-prepping.
What will the restaurant experience be like as restrictions are eased?
Kristel Arabian: What I've been hearing is patrons will wear masks until they need to take them off to eat. Some of the more thoughtful operators are thinking of providing paper envelopes to keep them safe, because they don't want the mask touching the table. We will no longer be handing things to people, we will be putting things down on the table. The host is not going to be a host any more. There's going to be more of a "safety captain" position instead, someone who greets you at the door. There aren't going to be any walk-ins. You can't just show up. Some restaurants are even talking about locking the doors.
Could outdoor dining spaces be beneficial, especially with growing evidence that it is safer to not be in enclosed spaces?
Arabian: We're hearing that natural airflow really helps. Everyone is wanting to limit their time indoors in public places. Los Angeles is working on expanding outdoor eating on sidewalks. Other cities, like Washington DC, have shut down really popular streets, they've turned them into a promenade, so that people can have distanced eating.
What are some of the changes in procedures being implemented for restaurant staff?
Rose: Masks, mandatory hand-washing. We're seeing that in certain establishments every employee has their temperature taken and basically needs a daily health waiver thing, that basically states "I have not traveled to any coronavirus hotspots in the last 14 days, I haven't been sick, nobody in my family is sick." You will also see the restaurant and food business start to talk about marketing their safety programs just as much as they market where their chicken comes from. There will also be new positions created, like the "head of sanitation".
Hardy: Before I open I want to get all my staff tested to make sure they're good. We've ordered sanitizer kits for every customer that comes in. I'm turning my [point of sale] system to a handheld system, the customer gets handed the handheld system, they can do their own thing, versus the cashier touching it. We've got masks, we're changing our aprons every 15 to 20 minutes, changing our gloves with every order.
Are you concerned that diners won't be ready to dine out even if restaurants are ready to open?
Rose: You're going to see a lot of people that will want to gently tiptoe back into it, and you're going to see people who are dying to get out there and sit down at a bar. They're going to need to wear masks in the restaurants, take it off when their food and drink shows up, and then put the masks back on. If it allows us to slowly reintroduce one of the most enjoyable things in our lives, and that is dining at a restaurant, a little discomfort isn't too much to ask for.
I hope society sees this and steps up and understands the pressure. When we do reopen at limited capacity with lots of new rules in place, people need to understand why they need to follow the rules. I hope that people do.
Max Hardy is a chef based in Detroit and founder of the River Bistro and Coop Detroit, a fast casual Caribbean fusion restaurant. In 2019, he was named one of 16 black chefs changing America by the New York Times
Jason Rose is an executive chef and the co-founder and president of Full-Heart Hospitality, a food, beverage and hospitality consultancy group. He has served as a culinary director for hospitality groups including Dean &amp; DeLuca
Kristel Arabian is a former chef; founder of Kitchen Culture Recruiting, a hospitality recruiting firm; and a founding member of the recently formed Independent Hospitality Coalition, a hospitality coalition focused on local and state issues