Trump 'penned political suicide note' at every Covid press conference, former Australian PM says
If US president handled coronavirus pandemic 'half-decently' he would have won election, John Howard says
The former Australian prime minister John Howard has said Donald Trump penned a lengthy "political suicide note" with his "terrible" handling of the coronavirus pandemic, without which the Republican would have prevailed against Joe Biden.
Howard, who led a conservative Coalition government for nearly 12 years, made the remarks on Wednesday night during a question and answer session at the Menzies Research Centre at the conclusion of a lecture delivered by the former National party leader John Anderson.
"If Donald Trump had handled the pandemic half-decently he would have won the election," Howard said.
"He was headed towards a victory until the pandemic hit. It was his mishandling of that because, in the end, the public, when threatened, want their leaders to defend them against the threat."
Howard said competent public health responses had increased the popularity of political leaders across Australia.
"That's why Scott Morrison has very high approvals, Gladys Berejiklian has, our friend [Mark McGowan] in Western Australia has, and even our friend in Victoria [Daniel Andrews] is surviving – he's more than surviving, politically, he is quite perpendicular at the present time," the former Liberal leader said. "Now part of that is a perception that difficult as it all was, and so forth, he got the show through."
Howard noted that Andrews, the Labor premier in Victoria, had been "open to a lot of political attack".
"I know this is not a political occasion so I shouldn't join in that attack," he said.
"But I think there's something to be said for the proposition – and this is an optimistic thing in a way – that the side of politics in America that embraced identity politics far more, namely the Democratic party side, sure Biden won, but given how appallingly Trump handled the pandemic how could he not win?
"Every time [Trump] had a news conference he was penning a political suicide note."
Howard, Australia's prime minister from 1996 to 2007, said Trump's handling of the pandemic was "terrible" but still the Republicans did "far better than many people expected" in Congress.
Anderson's lecture to the Liberal-aligned thinktank on Wednesday night railed against "wokeness" and identity politics.
Despite Biden's resounding victory both in the electoral college and the popular vote, Howard said he detected a backlash in "middle America" which prevented the Democrats from gaining control of the legislature.
"I draw a little bit of encouragement from that, not in a partisan sense – I am more sympathetic to the Republicans than I am to the Democrats – but I think probably there was a middle America rejection to be found in that election outcome, notwithstanding the fact that [Biden] won and I think you are starting to see it reflected in Biden's choice of people who will serve in his administration – they are not as leftwing and embracing of political correctness as you might expect."
Anderson agreed with Howard's thesis and declared the media in Australia and the US were preoccupied with characterising Trump as a "terrible person" rather than analysing his policies.
The former Nationals leader and deputy prime minister did not reflect on Trump's habitual lying while in office or the scandals that ultimately defined his presidency.
Anderson noted that an "astonishing" number of Americans voted for Trump despite the mismanagement of Covid-19. Howard said in response to that observation: "He did have a number of flaws."
And Anderson said the looming runoff election in the state of Georgia was "a very important runoff for the globe – I mean what happens in American politics at this point in history is probably as important to us as what happens here".
"I'm so motivated by what I see as the real potential for us to lose our freedoms," Anderson said. "I'm so despairing at our lack of, am I allowed to say, manning up."
After deciding he should instead say "humanising up" – "there's a touch of wokeism in everyone" – Anderson concluded by stating that when it came to the defence of freedom "it's all hands to the wheel".