Cancellations, lockouts and travel restrictions: the latest on the situation for Australian sport
Two members of the Australian Rugby Sevens program have been tested for coronavirus after showing signs and symptoms associated with the pandemic. Rugby Australia didn't specify whether they were players or staff, only announcing two people had self-isolated after experiencing symptoms this weekend.
Both had attended the RA high performance centre within its Moore Park headquarters in Sydney during the past week. As a precautionary measure, the governing body's headquarters will be closed for two days for an intensive clean. All administrative staff have been advised to work from home, and the Australian men's and women's sevens teams will not attend the facility on Monday or Tuesday. Results of the tests are expected to be known within 72 hours.
Australia's biggest sporting competitions, the AFL and NRL, will push on with their seasons despite the coronavirus outbreak shutting down leagues and events across the world. The NRL will continue next week, even after the New Zealand government's border restrictions to tackle the health pandemic.
Melbourne Storm's Cameron Smith has urged officials to rethink the decision and suspend the competition for at least two weeks. Smith said he was speaking for all Melbourne players when he highlighted his concern around family members and the team's constant travel load.
"There is something in place tomorrow to avoid being around groups larger than 500 people, and there are more than 500 people at airports and we're going to be doing that every second week," Smith said.
The worst-affected team, the Warriors, will base themselves in northern NSW given New Zealand's directive of a two-week isolation period for international travellers. Stephen Kearney's team will likely host its round two game next week against Canberra on the Gold Coast.
Warriors players Peta Hiku and Patrick Herbert returned home to New Zealand on Sunday morning, just hours before the isolation policy comes into effect at midnight (NZDT). Hiku's wife is heavily pregnant and expecting a child as soon as this week, while Herbert has a young baby. It is unclear when and if they will return to Australia.
All NRL games will be played behind closed doors indefinitely after the completion of round one. About 80,000 people have attended opening round NRL games, with two matches to close out the weekend on Sunday.
In a press conference this morning, Australian Rugby League Commission Chair Peter V'landys confirmed the NRL will ask the government for financial assistance should the season need to be suspended.
"I can't stress enough our game has never faced a challenge like this," V'landys said. "The longer it takes, the more pressure on our financial viability. It could have catastrophic effects on us going forward. Our money will only last so long and once its extinguished we are in big trouble.
"An Australia without rugby league is not Australia. The government has to assist us in this crisis because it is not of our own doing. Rugby league... is people's escape, it is people's relaxation. And we have to do everything we can to continue the tradition of rugby league."
Already the NRL has dipped into its 'distressed fund' to the tune of $6.8 million, allocating $425,000 to each of the 16 clubs to assist with the financial pressure of closing games to fans from round two. However, this is a meagre sum compared to the losses clubs are faced with from next weekend.
The AFL's season-opener between reigning premiers Richmond and Carlton, a contest that normally attracts up to 90,000 fans, is scheduled for the MCG on Thursday night. AFL boss Gillon McLachlan has confirmed that spectators will be locked out of stadiums indefinitely. With just two rounds to run before finals after this weekend, the AFLW will continue without fans in attendance.
But the escalating COVID-19 issue has forced Super Rugby to be suspended after Sunday's Australian derby between the Brumbies and NSW Waratahs in Canberra. With teams based across four countries, SANZAAR had no other option but to postpone the competition after New Zealand's announcement of travel restrictions.
Uncertainty surrounds the A-League with Wellington Phoenix declaring it would be "impossible" to host matches at home because of the country's restrictions. Sunday's clash between the Phoenix and Melbourne Victory at Sky Stadium is planned to go ahead.
The domestic cricket season could be over with Cricket Australia cancelling the final round of the Sheffield Shield. A decision about whether the Shield decider on March 27 goes ahead yet to be made.
It comes a day after the ODI series between Australia and New Zealand was abandoned a game into the Chappell-Hadlee contest so the Black Caps could rush home.
This weekend's Australian Formula One Grand Prix was cancelled on Friday after a McLaren team member tested positive for coronavirus.
The NBL's grand final series between Sydney Kings and Perth Wildcats will proceed with game three on Sunday to be played behind closed doors.
The A-League could be suspended with the governments of Australia and New Zealand imposing compulsory 14-day self-isolation periods to combat the coronavirus. Wellington Phoenix will host Melbourne Victory at Sky Stadium on Sunday, with travel restrictions taking effect in Australia and New Zealand at midnight. On Saturday following New Zealand announcing its health plan, the Phoenix said it would be "impossible" to host matches at home due to international travellers having to self-isolate for two weeks.
Major sporting competitions around the world, including the NBA and Premier League, have already suspended their seasons because of the coronavirus.