AFLW, AFL, NRL go behind closed doors as Covid-19 wreaks havoc in Australian sport
The NRL will stage games from next weekend in empty stadiums after the federal government announced a ban on non-essential gatherings of more than 500 people, effective Monday. The AFL's men's and women's competitions will also be held with no fans attending.
Basketball authorities closed the NBL's grand final series to spectators from Friday night's game two. Rugby union's Super Rugby games in Australia will follow suit from next weekend while swimming's hierarchy called off next month's national championships.
Australia's men's cricket team began a one-day international against New Zealand in an empty Sydney arena on Friday, hours after the Australian Grand Prix became the first sporting event in the country cancelled due to the coronavirus.
Organisers stopped the season opener while spectators were queuing to enter Melbourne's Albert Park circuit, their call coming after 14 people linked to the grand prix were tested – one, a McLaren team member, returning a positive. Supercars races were also cancelled, while Super Netball's pre-season tournament later this month was scrapped.
Australian sports had no choice but to follow leagues around the world in holding games without spectators or suspending competition after Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced the ban on non-essential mass gatherings.
NRL chief executive Todd Greenberg said Friday night's matches would proceed with spectators but round two games would be held in empty stadiums. The AFL's men's premiership season will start as scheduled next Thursday night without fans attending – the same scenario for the AFLW.
"The landscape is changing quickly; each organisation has their own set of challenges but our clubs, players, officials and fans know that the health and safety of all is the number one priority," AFL chief Gillon McLachlan said.
Rugby Australia's chief executive Raelene Castle said fans were allowed into Super Rugby games this weekend but would be banned indefinitely from the next round.
Cricket Australia chief executive Kevin Roberts said the decision to play one-dayers against New Zealand without spectators was common sense "in the face of an unprecedented public health issue".
CA also scrapped a national women's tour of South Africa scheduled next week as paceman Kane Richardson was quarantined from the rest of the men's squad because of a sore throat medicos were confident wasn't linked to coronavirus.
In basketball, the NBL's owner Larry Kestelman shut out fans from the grand final series between Perth Wildcats and Sydney Kings. "In the event of a player, staff member or official testing positive to coronavirus we will immediately suspend the series," Kestelman said.
Football Federation Australia called off all international travel from national teams, starting with next month's friendly between the Matildas and the United States in Utah.
But FFA chief executive officer James Johnson said A-League matches and W-League semi-finals on Friday and over the weekend would go ahead with crowds.
The World Surf League also suspended all events this month while cycling bosses cancelled the BMX national titles due to be held from 23 March.