Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson's travels: selfies, shows and beachside strolls before coronavirus diagnosis
The Hollywood couple's social media reveals they came into contact with quite a few people before diagnosing as positive for Covid-19
They are one of the highest profile Hollywood couples who attract wellwishers and autograph hunters in droves.
So when it was discovered that Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson had tested positive for coronavirus while in Australia, the premier of Queensland let it be known that anyone who came into close contact with them should self-isolate.
Social media shows the celebrity couple came into contact with quite a few people, though how many of those would qualify as "close contact" is unclear.
Close contact is defined as being face to face with someone for at least 15 minutes, or being in the same enclosed space for at least two hours, so it is highly unlikely any quick chance encounters would lead to a transmission.
Here is a timeline sourced from publicly available information of where Hanks and Wilson had been in the days leading up to their diagnoses.
On Thursday, Hanks and Wilson confirmed that they had tested positive for Covid-19, and were currently in a hospital on the Gold Coast.
Hanks had been in Queensland filming for an as yet untitled project about Elvis Presley, directed by Baz Luhrmann. "Tom has been having a wonderful time on the Gold Coast and we are so lucky to have Tom in Queensland," Palaszczuk said on Thursday.
Three days earlier, the couple shared multiple shots of a cruise they took on Sydney harbour.
Despite the pair posting photos with fans, Palaszczuk said that only people with "over 15 minutes of being in very close contact" were at risk, and "a selfie wouldn't count as that".
Wilson also appeared on Channel Nine's Today Extra show, as seen in this photo posted by hosts David Campbell and Belinda Russell.
Hanks was at Sydney's Bondi Beach on 8 March.
Wilson performed at the iconic venue on the night of 7 March. The Opera House confirmed that Wilson performed in the Utzon Room, a performance attended by approximately 207 people, including Hanks.
"Following news that the couple have tested positive for coronavirus in Queensland, the Opera House is in touch with NSW Health and Queensland Health and will be acting on their advice," a spokeswoman said.
Hanks and Wilson walked along the beach and then had a drink at the North Bondi RSL, according to footage captured by photographers.
Two days earlier, Wilson had also performed in Brisbane's South Bank.
A week earlier, Hanks was spotted by fans while on a Gold Coast beach.
It's as yet unknown when Hanks and Wilson entered Australia, but it is clear the Wilson was in Los Angeles as of 28 February – at a charity event for breast cancer research.
Similarly, Hanks and Wilson were in Los Angeles on 24 February.
Hanks and Wilson attended the Oscars awards ceremony in LA, where Hanks was nominated for best supporting actor for A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood.
However, it is unlikely he had contracted the virus at this point, a month before his diagnosis.
However, it is clear that Hanks was also in Australia prior to his attendance at the Oscars, with Brisbane's Courier Mail reporting that he shared a meal of 50c chicken wings on the Gold Coast with some fans.
Again, it is unlikely the Oscar-winning actor had contracted Covid-19 at this point.
Similarly, the actor posed for this photograph at a restaurant in NSW as early as 2 February.