'It isn't Mad Max': women charged after fight over toilet paper in Sydney
Two women, aged 23 and 60, will face court over a brawl at a western Sydney supermarket
Police have charged two women for an alleged fight over dwindling supplies of toilet paper in a Sydney supermarket.
Police said they were called to a Woolworths store at Chullora about 7am on Saturday after reports a 49-year-old woman had been assaulted.
A video of the incident was shared on social media and showed a small group of women pushing, yelling and fighting over a shopping cart filled with toilet paper.
"We just ask that people don't panic like this when they go out shopping," the New South Wales police acting inspector Andrew New said. "There is no need for it. It isn't the Thunderdome, it isn't Mad Max, we don't need to do that.
"Violence of this nature will not be tolerated and anyone involved in this behaviour may be committing an offence and find themselves before the court.
"There is no need for people to go out and panic buy at supermarkets, paracetamol and canned food or toilet paper."
Two women, aged 23 and 60, both from Bankstown, spoke to police at Bankstown police station on Saturday night. They were both issued with summons to attend the Bankstown local court on 28 April on charges of affray.
Under the NSW Crimes Act, a person may be charged with affray if they "use or threaten unlawful violence towards another, and whose conduct is such as would cause a person of reasonable firmness present the scene to fear for his or her personal safety".
If two or more people are alleged to have used or threatened unlawful violence, the court must consider their conduct as a whole.
The video shows one woman pulling the hair of another during the heated altercation.
One woman yells: "I just want one packet."
Another woman, who is in possession of the trolley packed with toilet paper, replies "No, not one packet," before two supermarket workers intervene to break up the argument.
The woman was not injured and no arrests were made, however police now want to interview the other woman involved in the altercation.
Earlier in the week, Woolworths imposed a four-packet limit on the sale of toilet paper after having its shelves stripped by shoppers.
"We will not tolerate violence of any kind from our customers in our stores and we are working with police who are investigating the matter," a Woolworths spokesperson said.
Australian Associated Press contributed to this report