Sydney's Epping boys high school shut down after student tests positive for coronavirus
Almost 1,200 pupils at Epping boys high school in city's north-west told to stay at home
A Sydney high school has been shut down after a year 11 student tested positive for coronavirus.
The almost 1,200 pupils at Epping boys high school were told to stay home on Friday after a 16-year-old boy was diagnosed as having the virus on Thursday night.
"I implore parents not to panic but to make sure your child stays home," the New South Wales health minister, Brad Hazzard, said on Friday. "The young fellow ... he is not bad, but he is not well."
The state government has yet to say how long the school closure could run for, but staff and students have been told to isolate themselves at the weekend. People who have been in close contact with the student have been told to self-isolate for 14 days.
"Our first concern is for the health of the school's students, and it was decided that until we learned more about this specific case, the school should be closed as a precaution," the NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, said on Friday.
The number of confirmed cases of the Covid-19 virus in Australia has risen to 55. Almost almost half of those are in NSW, which has 25 confirmed cases, up from about nine last week.
"So it's almost tripled just in a week," Hazzard told Nine's Today show. "Out of those 25, I think we have nine now who have actually been infected on our soil rather than coming in from overseas.
"And that means that we are getting an increasing number of people who are passing that on – transmitting it – on NSW soil."
On Thursday afternoon the state government announced that 84 workers at two Sydney hospitals had been placed in isolation after two doctors – from Ryde and Liverpool – contracted the virus.
Elsewhere, the Northern Territory had its first confirmed case on Thursday after a tourist fell ill, and a baby in South Australia has also been confirmed as having the virus.
Epping boys high school is less than 2km from the Macquarie University Banksia and Gumnut childcare centre. Seventeen children who attend that centre are now being tested after they visited a nearby aged care facility where a female resident, 95, died this week and was later found to have been infected with the virus.
The children from Banksia Cottage childcare centre had visited residents at the Dorothy Henderson Lodge at Macquarie Park on 24 February. Two other residents, aged 82 and 70, have also been infected after an aged care nurse working at the facility tested positive.
The NSW chief medical officer, Dr Kerry Chant, has warned that more residents could be diagnosed with the virus. She told aged care facilities to stop hosting children from childcare centres to reduce the risk of infection for Australia's most elderly and frail.