Watching brief adopted as Australian sport braces for true impact of coronavirus
If the trend of increasing infection is to continue, the effect on sport in Australia could be profound
The threat of the coronavirus is now officially a global citizen. The real threat – death and infection – has given rise to imagined threats that prompt some to don useless face masks as if they're guardians of the galaxy, others to clear supermarket shelves of toilet paper like there's no tomorrow and others still to suspect a drunk woman on a flight was in fact a carrier of the virus.
Real or imagined, the knock-on effects of the global outbreak are palpable, and professional sport, its stadia packed to the brim with fans at close quarters, is anything but immune. The Tokyo Olympics have come under threat and Uefa has expressed concerns as Euro 2020 approaches, while cricketers have been advised not to shake hands and NBA players have been told to avoid high-fiving fans. Think of any sport – tennis, golf, rugby, cycling, baseball, biathlon even – and chances are it has been impacted by coronavirus in some capacity.
To Australians, these have hitherto been other people's problems. But as with most things, when the world sneezes Australia catches a cold. While authorities grapple with the task of containment and isolation, it seems the situation will get worse before it gets better. Reported cases of infection are rising; on Wednesday, the number of people to become infected in NSW almost doubled. In Victoria, the government says there could be delays to elective surgeries as the disease spreads and hospitals need to safeguard capacity.
If this trend is to continue, the effect on sport in Australia could be profound. As another congested year of sport prepares to get even busier, fans should brace for a calendar that is at best disrupted, at worst decimated.
Formula One, which has already postponed the Chinese Grand Prix, has insisted the Australian leg in Melbourne this month will go ahead. But with F1 taking its lead from health experts, its position will be reviewed daily ahead of the 15 March race. "We continue to closely monitor the situation in the lead-up to the grand prix and are taking guidance from subject-matter experts, including Victorian and national chief health officers and the Australian Health Protection principal committee," Andrew Westacott, the chief executive of the Australian GP, said on Monday.
The immediate fate of Australia's national football teams is now a daily discussion. The Socceroos are in the midst of World Cup qualifiers – they are scheduled to play in Nepal at the end of March – and in June are booked to make their maiden appearance in the Copa América. The Matildas are two games away from Olympics qualification and the second leg of their Asian playoff is to be played in the Vietnamese province of Quảng Ninh on 11 March.
Football Federation Australia, like F1, will yield to advice from health authorities when it comes to making decisions.
"FFA has been proactively monitoring the coronavirus situation for months," an FFA spokesman told Guardian Australia. "Currently, FFA is monitoring the situation nationally and internationally and following advice from relevant government departments, including the Australian Institute of Sport.
"FFA had representatives at an Asian Football Confederation meeting in Kuala Lumpur earlier this week, as a global view regarding the scheduling of matches is considered by regional and international bodies. FFA will put the health and safety of all players, coaches, staff, and spectators first when it comes to traveling to fixtures abroad or hosting matches at home."
On Wednesday, the AFL announced its annual premiership match in China would this year be relocated to Australia, reflecting the stance that the wellbeing of participants and supporters is the main priority. "Our team have monitored the situation in China closely. It is evident that the coronavirus still poses a significant risk internationally and quite simply we will not compromise the health and safety of any of our clubs, supporters and AFL team members," Gillon McLachlan, the AFL chief executive, said.
Cricket Australia, too, is taking a safety-first approach. "CA continues to monitor the coronavirus situation and has consulted an infectious diseases specialist. In addition, the Australian Institute of Sport is coordinating a consistent approach for all Australian sports, which includes following the latest DFAT travel guidelines. We endorse the AIS position statement," a spokesman said.
"We know where our teams are traveling in the next six months and will continue to monitor the situation in the regions they are scheduled to visit. At this stage, we are advised that the regions our teams are scheduled to tour are not currently impacted. We are taking the issue seriously and approaching it in a thorough, common sense manner."
Elsewhere domestically, Super Rugby (which relies heavily on international travel) is in full swing, the A-League, W-League and AFLW seasons are approaching finals and the AFL and NRL seasons are barely weeks away. In cricket, the Women's T20 World Cup is in its final stages but there is much to be said and done before the men's event reaches its intended start date in Australia on 18 October. In the present climate, a watching brief is applied to all.
So far, the coronavirus global death toll sits north of 3,100, with more than 90,000 people infected in 73 countries and territories. For all the hysteria and fear mongering, planet earth has a health crisis on its hands that isn't going away any time soon. Australia, and Australian sport, is no longer looking on from afar.