Coronavirus: panic-buying Australians are 'really overreacting', experts warn
Infectious disease experts recommend having essential medicines and two weeks of food on hand, saying hoarding is 'unhelpful'
A leading infectious disease expert with Canberra hospital has urged Australians to be sensible as consumers report supermarket shelves have been emptied of items such as toilet paper and paracetamol in the midst of coronavirus fears.
Professor Peter Collignon said people should have a supply of prescription medicines to last them for between two and four weeks, just in case community transmission becomes widespread. But he said this was a measure people should take even if the coronavirus wasn't circulating.
"It's always good to have a supply of critical medicines, particularly if you have conditions like diabetes," Collignon said. "As for over-the-counter medicines, a packet of Panadol or Nurofen lasts a long time and most people have a packet on hand, and that's all people need. You don't need boxes and boxes of the stuff."
Parents with children should be used to having medicines and food on hand in case their child caught an infectious disease that may affect the whole family and require staying home, he said. Shopping orders using the internet and apps would remain an option even if people ran out of something, he added.
"Of course, it's hard to predict how the supply chain around the world will cope," Collignon, who has worked as an adviser to the World Health Organization, said. "But people are really overreacting to this. We need to restore some balance here. In Australia we produce more food than we can eat because we are a net exporter of food. You're not going to run out of food, you might not have same choice of foods but you won't be left without."
People just needed to think about what they would need for their family if they had to stay home for a couple of weeks, and purchase those goods during their next few visits to the supermarket, he said. There was no need to rush out and buy supplies, with many homes already in possession of nonperishable items like rice and pasta.
The chief medical officer, Professor Brendan Murphy, along with the president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Tony Bartone, have both told people not to stockpile beyond having essential medicines and two weeks of food on hand. But this has not stopped consumers from buying up toilet paper, flour, rice and nonperishable goods in bulk.
"The worst-case scenario for most people is you will become ill and need to quarantine, so you're out of action for two weeks," Bartone told Guardian Australia. "That's all you need. Two weeks worth of stuff. Most modern pantries, with the exception of fresh food, can deal with that without too much trouble.
"You don't need to stock up bunkers. Certain things will become in short supply because of supply chain logistics … but there will be alternatives to circumvent shortages. If everyone goes out and panic-buys, forget supply chain issues caused by coronavirus, you'll stretch any supply.
"Aside from the food your family might need, you might want to get a bottle of Panadol, electrolyte replacement solution, and obviously medications. Most people do already have these items, and about a month's worth of any prescription medication on hand."
People have time to buy items, he added. "It's not in the community in any big way."
Professor Mary-Louise McLaws, an infection control expert with the University of New South Wales, agreed filling two to four weeks' worth of prescription medications was sensible. People could check with their pharmacist about anticipated shortages and about whether they delivered, she added.
"For the average Australian, if you're on a good wage, you're not really helping those who manage week-to-week who may have a family if you stockpile months worth of goods," McLaws said. "So think carefully about what you're doing to the average Australian who is not as fortunate. It's a good time to check in on elderly neighbours and be aware of them, and if they need anything.
"I'm not a prepper for the coronavirus because I think its unAustralian and unhelpful."
Some shoppers have been opportunistic, buying items such as hand sanitiser and face masks in bulk and selling them on Gumtree and eBay. However, face masks are not recommended, except for infected people and health workers, and the main recommendation around hand hygiene is to regularly scrub hands with soap.
Empty shelves in supermarkets are unlikely to remain bare for long, with major chains like Coles and Woolworths already replacing stock. A spokeswoman for Coles said the company had increased stock of long-life food and healthcare products. A Woolworths spokesman said while an increase in demand for long-life pantry items had led to partial stock shortages, these would be temporary.
The health minister Greg Hunt said families should be reassured there was limited transmissibility to children and a mild impact on children it did infect.
An associate professor in disaster and emergency response at Edith Cowan University, Erin Smith, said due to natural disasters that affected Australia such as bushfires, she encouraged people to think about their preparedness regardless of the coronavirus situation.
"It's always good to think about the things your family would need to get by if there was a blackout for example," she said. "It's sensible and it's also practical to encourage people to be thinking about this. But we don't want panic-buying. If people rush out, prices may also increase on the limited resources left.
"You don't need to go mad and go for buying months worth of supplies with nowhere to store it."