Coronavirus: NSW public school principals told to cancel or delay students' overseas trips
Ban does not apply to independent schools in Australia but Catholic school system will decide 'case by case'
Public schools in New South Wales have been told to stop overseas excursions amid growing concern about the spread of the coronavirus in Australia.
After the first two cases of community transmission in NSW were confirmed this week, the state's education department wrote to principals instructing them to cancel or delay overseas trips.
"Many of our schools have planned overseas travel or excursions to occur during the year," the letter said. "However, with the current Covid-19 situation, the safety of our students and staff is paramount and it is for this reason that all overseas excursions are required to be now placed on hold until further notice.
"If you have an excursion planned for later in term one you will need to make the necessary arrangement to cancel the excursion or consider rescheduling until later in the year."
Students returning from China and Iran already must self-isolate for 14 days, but banning overseas trips goes beyond the advice from the foreign affairs and trade department.
The ban does not apply to independent schools, although the Catholic school sector said it would decide "case by case".
Other states, including Queensland and Victoria, have no formal ban on travel although some schools have cancelled trips.
"At this stage no blanket ban has been imposed with regards to overseas school excursions," the Queensland education minister, Grace Grace, said.
"As with all issues relating to coronavirus, we take advice from the chief health officer and in consideration of Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade advice.
"I am aware that some schools have reconsidered their overseas travel plans and have postponed trips until later in the year. Should the advice change to warrant a blanket ban, we will act accordingly."
In Western Australia, education officials have told students to stay home if they have been in close contact with a confirmed case of coronavirus "irrespective of whether they have developed symptoms".
The NSW Health pandemic plan lists schools as potential overflow facilities in a worst-case scenario where hospitals are overrun. However, the plan said school closures might not be effective in stopping the spread of the virus.
"It is important to note that school closures have only been shown to be moderately effective at reducing transmission rates and the timing and duration of closures would need to be carefully considered," the plan states.
"Therefore a range of measures designed to help reduce social mixing of students in order to reduce transmission of the pandemic virus may be considered."
Last week the West Australian chief health officer, Andrew Robertson, said the state would consider closing schools if officials believed it would limit the spread of the virus.
Schools would be closed only if "we believe there had been a spread in a community and that we wanted to limit that spread further in that community and felt that schools were a place that spread may be occurring".
"One of the challenges here is that we don't really know what the spread will be in the community, but based on other countries we have to prepare for significant numbers of our population, whether that's tens of thousands or less numbers, it's hard to say," he said.