Coronavirus latest: 30 March, at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
According to data collected by Johns Hopkins University, at least 35,307 people have now died as a result of the outbreak. The institution says it has counted 745,308 confirmed cases worldwide, while at least 156,875 people have recovered.
The Department of Health and Social Care says 134,946 people have been tested for the virus, with 22,141 returning as positive. Official figures show that, as of 5pm on Sunday (BST), 1,408 people across the country have died.
The death toll from an outbreak of coronavirus in Italy has climbed by 812 to 11,591, the country's civil protection agency says, reversing two days of declines in the daily rate. But the number of new cases rose by just 4,050; the lowest nominal increase since 17 March. A total 101,739 people have now tested positive.
As many as 200,000 people in the US may die even if Washington plays its response to the outbreak "almost perfectly", according Dr Deborah Birx, the response coordinator for the White House coronavirus taskforce.
"If we do things together well, almost perfectly, we could get in the range of 100,000 to 200,000 fatalities," she told told NBC News' Today. We don't even want to see that … the best-case scenario would be 100% of Americans doing precisely what is required, but we're not sure … that all of America is responding in a uniform way to protect one another."
Tens of thousands of people stranded abroad will be flown back to the UK by airlines including British Airways, Virgin Atlantic and Titan Airways on chartered planes as part of a partnership between the government and private enterprise announced by the country's foreign secretary, Dominic Raab.
Benjamin Netanyahu and his key advisers isolate themselves after one of the prime minister's aides tested positive for the coronavirus.
It is a precautionary measure and officials say the 70-year-old leader is unlikely to have been infected. Netanyahu is due to undergo a coronavirus test. A previous test he took was negative.
Indigenous leaders from across the continent are warning that the outbreak poses an "existential threat" to them. Tribes in the Amazon and Chaco regions are urging governments to ensure their territories are protected against outsiders possibly carrying the coronavirus.
Viktor Orbán secures sweeping new powers to fight the outbreak. The country's parliament passed a law submitted by his government handing Orbán an open-ended mandate, triggering criticism by the domestic opposition, human rights groups and the Council of Europe, Europe's main rights forum, as it contains no clear timeframe.
The six-month multibillion-dollar trade fair that organisers had hoped would attract 25 million visitors will not go ahead as scheduled in October. Dubai was pinning many of its economic forecasts on the trade it was expected to generate.
Introducing the requirement is a "necessary step" to help to prevent the airborne transmission of the virus, says the Austrian chancellor, Sebastian Kurz. Shoppers are to be handed masks covering their mouthes and noses at the entrance of supermarkets from Wednesday.