Coronavirus latest: 29 March, at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
More than 30,800 people have died after contracting Covid-19, from more than 664,000 confirmed cases. Among the countries to report new cases are South Korea (105) and and Thailand (143). China said it had 45 new cases on Saturday with all but one imported. France has passed 2,000 deaths. Spain, Northern Ireland and Timor-Leste are among countries to introduce new waves of restrictions.
Donald Trump flagged an enforced regional quarantine of the state of New York and parts of Connecticut and New Jersey, saying "some people would like to see New York quarantined because it's a hotspot". But he backed off after the New York governor, Andrew Cuomo, said sealing off the states would amount to "a federal declaration of war". The US CDC then issued an urgent warning, effective immediately, against all non-essential domestic travel in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut for 14 days. The order was due to "extensive community transmission" in the areas. Employees of trucking, food supply, financial services and some other industries were exempt from the measure, and governors of the three states had full discretion over how to carry out the advisory. More than 120,000 people have become infected with Covid-19 in the US.
The first of up to 10 flights to be sent to China to pick up medical equipment for Ireland was on its way back on Sunday morning. More than €225m had been spent on personal protective equipment for Irish health workers, said the minister for health, Simon Harris. Usually around €15m is spent in a year.
New Zealand authorities reported the first death from Covid-19 on Sunday. The West Coast woman was in her 70s, and was initially diagnosed with influenza. Because of this hospital staff were only wearing PPE suitable for a case of influenza, not Covid-19, and 21 people were now in self-isolation. Authorities said none of the staff were showing symptoms and staffing at the hospital wouldn't be affected because of the cancellation of all elective procedures.
Sophie Gregoire Trudeau, wife of the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said she had recovered from Covid-19. Her husband and their three children have been in isolation without symptoms. "When we get through this, we will be stronger because we will have had each other's backs," she said on social media.
Thousands of African, Haitian and Asian migrants bound for the United States have amassed in immigration shelters in Panama and Costa Rica as plans to relocate them to less crowded areas to lower the risk of spreading the coronavirus have faltered. Costa Rica's government has said it began transferring about 2,600 migrants headed for the United States from its southern border with Panama to its frontier with Nicaragua, citing concerns that large crowds could further spread the virus. However, the head of Costa Rica's immigration office, Raquel Vargas, told Reuters on Saturday that the transfer was suspended until further notice.
The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, said Australia's daily rate of increase in confirmed cases had dropped from between 25-30% down to 13-15%, which showed the government's containment measures were working. However the Australian government would not release modelling to support this. Government and health authorities expressed anger at reports of 33 medical professionals who returned to Australia on Saturday night but did not go into the mandatory hotel quarantine announced by the government on Friday. The state health minister said it was "bitterly disappointing … They are the people you would expect to know better than anyone else." Morrison told media that out of the country's 3,809 confirmed cases there were 2,562 imported from overseas. Two new fatalities were reported on Sunday, bringing the country's death toll from the outbreak to 16.
The Zandam cruise ship, with hundreds of passengers on board including at least 130 with flu-like symptoms, has been granted passage through the Panama Canal. Four people on the ship have died and others with symptoms have been diagnosed with Covid-19.
A letter from the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, who is in isolation with Covid-19, will be sent to every household in Britain, warning that the epidemic will get worse before it gets better.