Coronavirus latest: at a glance
A summary of big developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Doctors and nurses on the front lines of the US coronavirus crisis have pleaded for more protective gear and equipment to treat waves of patients expected to overwhelm hospitals as the number of known infections surpassed 100,000 – the most in any one country – with more than 1,600 dead.
Italy also recorded its highest daily number of deaths – the 969 fatalities were also the highest daily figure in any country so far, according to AFP. The fatalities took the country's death toll to 9,134 while the total number of cases topped 86,400, second only to the US, according to Johns Hopkins University. The head of Italy's national health institute warned that infections had not yet reached their peak and lockdown measures would have to be extended.
In an attempt to contain community transmission, Australian states have implemented fines, closed beaches and threatened stricter measures if people defy pleas to stay at home. The death toll from the virus rose to 14 after an elderly woman died in an aged-care facility in New South Wales, where several residents and employees have tested positive.
South Korea reported 146 new coronavirus cases on Friday, the highest number in a week, its disease control agency said on Saturday, with the country suffering a rise in imported cases from Europe and the United States during recent days.
China's National Health Commission said on Saturday that 54 new coronavirus cases were reported on the mainland on Friday, all involving so-called imported cases. There were 55 new cases a day earlier.
After Boris Johnson tested positive for Covid-19, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, and the chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, confirmed they both had coronavirus with mild symptoms as well, and were self-isolating.
An Iranian doctor said hundreds have died and thousands have been sickened from ingesting toxic methanol across the Islamic Republic out of the false belief it kills the new coronavirus.