Coronavirus latest: 23 March at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Boris Johnson will order police to enforce a strict coronavirus lockdown, with a ban on gatherings of more than two people and strict limits on exercise. After days of being accused of sending mixed messages about what the public should do, the prime minister ratcheted up Britain's response with an address to the nation on Monday evening, warning that people "must stay at home", and will only be allowed outside to buy food or medication, exercise alone once a day, or to travel to work if absolutely necessary.
Confirmed cases in the UK have reached 6,726 and there have been 336 deaths from the virus in the country.
According to figures from Johns Hopkins University, 100,958 people confirmed to have contracted Covid-19 have now recovered from the illness, more than half of them in China.
That figure represents almost a third of the people known to have been infected around the world. However, these figures are partly based on official releases and could, therefore, underestimate the number of confirmed cases. The institution has counted 378,287 confirmed cases and 16,497 confirmed deaths.
In a televised press conference from the White House on Monday evening, Donald Trump said he hoped to get the US economy going again as soon as possible and was not open to the idea of restrictive public health measures going on for months.
"I'm not looking at months, I can tell you right now," he said adding that a bad economy caused deaths as well, due to suicide. Trump's comments came as the US recorded 552 deaths and more than 43,600 confirmed cases of the virus.
India has announced that it is stopping domestic flights and said the majority of the country was under complete lockdown. The country has reported 499 cases of coronavirus, and 10 deaths, one of whom was a 54-year-old man with no history of foreign travel, suggesting the start of community transmission of the virus, officials said. Health experts have said that a big jump could be imminent, which would overwhelm the underfunded and crumbling public health infrastructure.
António Guterres, the United Nations secretary general, has appealed for an immediate global ceasefire, calling on an end to all armed conflicts so that the world can instead focus on fighting coronavirus. "Silence the guns; stop the artillery; end the airstrikes," he said. "This is crucial to help create corridors for lifesaving aids. To open precious windows for diplomacy. To bring hope to places among the most vulnerable to Covid-19."
Italy, which has seen the most deaths of any nation, registered a smaller day-to-day increase in new coronavirus cases. The death toll from the outbreak grew by 602 to 6,078, the head of the Civil Protection Agency said. While that is an 11% increase, it is the smallest nominal rise since last Thursday.
The New York governor, Andrew Cuomo, said the state had 5,707 new cases, meaning it has confirmed 20,875 in total. Of those, 13% have needed to be cared for in hospital, around a quarter of whom are in intensive care, and 157 people have died. Dr Deborah Birx, the response coordinator for Trump's coronavirus task force, said that in New York, the virus attack rate was close to 1 in 1,000 and that 28% of submitted specimens were positive in this area, compared with about 8% in the rest of the country.