US state governors impose tighter restrictions to slow coronavirus spread
A growing number of US state governors are imposing tight restrictions on their residents to try to contain the coronavirus outbreak, including ordering tens of millions of residents to stay at home and all non-essential businesses to close, as the United States gradually moves into a form of lockdown.
Illinois and Connecticut on Friday afternoon joined New York in telling all residents to stay home outside of certain permissible activities and essential work services. This followed such an order by California earlier in the week, while Pennsylvania on Thursday mandated all non-essential business to close and New Jersey planned to take similar action on Saturday.
New York's governor, Andrew Cuomo, on Friday morning said all non-essential businesses must close and all non-essential members of the workforce must stay home in the latest of several extreme measures to prevent the spread of the coronavirus in the state.
"This is the most drastic action we can take," Cuomo said in a press conference on Friday morning, adding that the measures would take effect on Sunday night and would be "enforced".
The state is home to more than 19 million residents, and has seen its number of cases soar in recent days.
The move came as the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, announced that the US-Mexico border was closing to all non-essential travel. The same restrictions will take affect at the US-Canadian border tonight at midnight.
Donald Trump said at a White House briefing that there were no current plans to order a national lockdown. The White House also announced Friday that a member of vice-president Mike Pence's staff had tested positive for the virus and that contact tracing was under way, but that neither Pence nor Trump had close contact with the individual.
Cuomo took the dramatic actions as confirmed cases in New York climbed to more than 7,000. Cuomo reported that the state's number of fatalities had increased to 35. Johns Hopkins University, which has been tallying deaths globally, put the state's fatality count at 38.
"We're going to close the valve, because the rate of increase in the number of cases portends a total overwhelming of our hospital system," Cuomo said.
Cuomo said all non-essential gatherings of any size would be banned in the state of 19 million residents amid the pandemic. He said residents can go outside for only solitary exercise and mandated that all people should stay at least 6ft away from other people when they are out in public.
"There are people and places in New York City where it looks like life as usual," Cuomo said. "No, this is not life as usual."
Cuomo said he would sign an executive order on Friday tightening previous work-from-home exemptions. He emphasised that medical workers and transit workers were considered essential.
Later on Friday, the Illinois governor, JB Pritzker, and Connecticut governor, Ned Lamont, issued similar orders.
Earlier in the day, Cuomo said barbershops, hair salons, tattoo and piercing parlors, and nail salons in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and Pennsylvania must close on Saturday to slow the spread of the coronavirus.
Cuomo said the number of coronavirus cases was "going up at such a rate" that they were already "double the capacity of the hospital system" and "more than triple the capacity of our ICU system". He said the only solution was to try to "close the valve" on infection rates.
Cuomo reiterated the increasing number of cases was a reflection of the expanding testing capacities in the state. New York performed 10,000 tests overnight, bringing the total number of people tested in the state to more than 32,000.
"The tests are just demonstrating what was," Cuomo said. "Finding positives is a good thing because then we can isolate and track back."
The governor said he wants to be able to look back on the coronavirus pandemic and be able to say: "I did everything we could do … This is about saving lives. If everything we do saves just one life, I'll be happy."
He added: "There will be a moratorium on evictions, residential or commercial, for 90 days … I know that we're going to put people out of work with what I did, I want to make sure I don't put them out of their house."
Cuomo's announcement comes one day after California's governor, Gavin Newsom, announced all of the state's 40 million residents must stay indoors except for essential activities, and order known as "shelter in place".
But Cuomo pushed back against a reporter who characterized the New York restrictions as a "shelter-in-place order".
Cuomo said the language used to describe the restrictions matter, and he does not want to unnecessarily scare people about the new reality. He said he made the decision to restrict all non-essential activity in consultation with local leaders, but he emphasized he accepts "full responsibility" for the decision.
"If somebody is unhappy, if somebody wants to blame somebody or complain about someone, blame me," he said.