Climate activists use phone banking to urge older Americans to stay home
Sunrise Movement will utilize system for advocating Bernie Sanders' platform to foster community in a time of unprecedented isolation
Young climate activists are taking to the phones to convince older people the coronavirus is serious and provide essential information both to help them stay safe and to slow the spread.
The Sunrise Movement will utilize its own phone-banking platform, which organizers used to talk to hundreds of thousands of young voters about Bernie Sanders, whom the group endorsed for the Democratic presidential nomination.
The "persuasion effort" is meant to share valuable information "while highlighting why the crisis underlines the urgent need for transformative policy agendas that totally transform society", the group said.
Organizers are branding their effort as the People's Dialer campaign, which they said "means you're willing to fight for someone you don't know", a catchphrase from the Sanders campaign.
"This is an especially isolating time for our elders, people with compromised immune systems and those with underlying illnesses," the group's pitch to volunteers says.
"As Sunrisers, we have both the opportunity – and obligation – to practice the vision we preach: a vision of a future in which everyone in our community is invested in the wellbeing of everyone else. Everyone is taken care of. Everyone is valuable."
The Sunrise Movement advocates for a Green New Deal, a re-envisioning of society to stall and respond to the climate crisis while reducing inequity.
"There's never been a clearer need for the kind of economy and society built on care and compassion that the Green New Deal envisions," said spokesman Alex O'Keefe.
O'Keefe said the idea came while quarantined friends in Philadelphia were "watching the administration just completely fail to respond to the coronavirus" and looking for ways to help.
"We were just thinking – what would it look like if we responded to this crisis as organizers, if we had organizers in the Oval Office," O'Keefe said.
The phone bankers will not be advocating for a political candidate.
What started in Philadelphia will soon go nationwide and be open to the Sunrise Movement's network of 300,000 people.
For the soft launch of the program, volunteers will be directed to people over the age of 50 in two areas: Dallas and San Francisco. If the pilot phase is successful, the group will develop the infrastructure over time to make the program hyper-localized, so volunteers can talk to people in their own city or region.
O'Keefe said most of the people contacted wanted help figuring out if they were quarantining or social distancing correctly.
Avoiding contact with others is critically important for people over 60, who are more likely to have serious complications or die from the virus. The group is preparing callers with updated information from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and state health officials.