New York and neighboring states order hair salons and nail parlors to close
Governor Andrew Cuomo of New York has signed an executive order mandating that all barbershops, hair salons and other personal care services be closed to members of the public, effective Saturday.
The order applies to all barbershops, hair salons, tattoo or piercing parlors, nail salons, hair removal services and related groomers. Cuomo expanded the restrictions in a joint agreement with governors from New Jersey, Connecticut and Pennsylvania.
"We know how the novel coronavirus spreads, and we are making data-driven decisions as the situation evolves to continue to reduce density and slow the spread of the virus," Governor Cuomo said in a press release announcing the order.
"We remain in constant communication with our neighboring states to ensure we are establishing a set of uniform rules and regulations for the entire region," the governor said.
The closure mandate is part of an ongoing effort to battle the spread of the novel coronavirus. New York had quickly become a hotbed of new cases following its first confirmed coronavirus infection in late February.
According to data from John Hopkins University, New York state has reported more than 5,700 confirmed cases, and, so far, more than 35 deaths. Earlier this month, a rise in outbreaks led the state to send its national guard to help contain the spread in New Rochelle, a suburb believed to be the nation's biggest cluster of coronavirus cases.
Cases continued to climb elsewhere, including New York City, home to more than 8 million people.
In response, Cuomo issued a state disaster emergency for the entire state of New York. Officials instituted restrictions on social and recreational gatherings, limiting them to fewer than 50 people.
Entertainment venues including movie theaters, amusement parks, bowling alleys malls and casinos have already been ordered closed. Restaurants and bars are limited to takeout and delivery services only.
The measure also states non-essential businesses must institute staff reductions, ordering up to 75% of non-essential workers to stay away or work from home.
"These temporary closures are not going to be easy, but they are necessary to protecting the health and safety of New Yorkers and all Americans."
New York state, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Connecticut join several other states nationwide to enact bans on public gatherings and enforcing business closures to combat the spread of the coronavirus.
To ease some burdens, however, Cuomo also issued an executive order authorizing notaries public to perform notary services via audio-visual technology. The state is also currently producing its own hand sanitizer.