'It's chaos': New York, New Jersey and Connecticut close bars and restaurants
States' governors also announce closures of businesses from movie theaters to gyms and beyond
Bars and restaurants in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut will become takeout-only and businesses from movie theaters and casinos to gyms and beyond will be shuttered because of the coronavirus, the states' governors said on Monday.
The governors said essential businesses such as supermarkets, gas stations and pharmacies would be able to stay open after 8pm on Monday, though all non-essential businesses must close. Restaurants will be able to offer takeout and delivery.
It is the latest escalation of efforts to keep people apart in the New York metropolitan area, in hopes of curbing the spread of the virus, and an attempt to coordinate a regional response in the face of what the Democratic governors called lagging federal action under a Republican White House.
"It's chaos," New York's governor, Andrew Cuomo, said during a joint conference call with the other governors.
"I think it actually feeds the feeling that the country's out of control. There is no clear direction, there is no clear path."
New York City bars and restaurants were already set to shut dining rooms and take up their barstools on Tuesday morning, under a plan the Democratic mayor, Bill de Blasio, announced on Sunday.
Illinois, Ohio, Massachusetts and Washington state are among places that have ordered bars to close and restaurants to stop dine-in service.
For most people, the virus causes only mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness, including pneumonia, and death.
The vast majority of people recover. According to the World Health Organization, people with mild illness recover in about two weeks, while those with more severe illness may take three to six weeks to recover.
According to figures collated by the New York Times, as of Monday morning 3,602 cases had been confirmed in the US and 66 people have died.
The governors also said crowds will be limited to 50 people effective at 8pm.
It's unclear when business will return to normal. The governors said essential businesses including supermarkets, gas stations and pharmacies will remain open.
How New York's and Connecticut's tribal casinos will be affected is not clear. Connecticut is "strongly urging their tribal partners to close tribal casinos," according to Governor Ned Lamont.