Coronavirus latest: 15 March at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak include:
The epidemic in the UK will last until next spring and could lead to 7.9 million people being hospitalised, according to a secret Public Health England (PHE) briefing for senior NHS officials.
The Federal Reserve cut interest rates for the second time in less than two weeks on Sunday in an emergency move to help shore up the US economy amid the rapidly accelerating global pandemic. In a statement, the US central bank said it was cutting rates by a percentage point to a target range of 0% to 0.25%.
France's Public Health Authority on Sunday reported 36 new deaths from coronavirus, taking the total to 127, and said there had been an increase of more than 1,000 cases. The number of cases stood at 5,423, up from 4,449 on Saturday.
Boris Johnson will seek to shore up public confidence in the government's handling of the pandemic on Monday by holding the first of what are intended to be daily ministerial press conferences.
California governor Gavin Newsom ordered all clubs and bars in the state to close and called for anyone aged 65 or older to stay at home. The directive came on Sunday as it was announced coronavirus had killed six people in the state, with 335 cases confirmed – the third highest number in the US after Washington and New York. Bars and restaurants in Illinois and Ohio have also been ordered to close.
New York City will close the nation's largest public school system on Monday, sending over 1.1 million children home in the hope of curbing the spread of coronavirus. Mayor Bill de Blasio announced the decision to close schools until at least 20 April and possibly for the school year, following a growing number of school closures in communities and entire states nationwide, and mounting pressure from within New York.
South Africa has declared a national disaster and introduced drastic measures to fight the outbreak. In a televised address on Sunday evening, president Cyril Ramaphosa announced bans on flights to and from Italy, Spain, Germany, UK, the US, South Korea, Iran and China from Wednesday. The total number of cases in the country stood at 60 on Sunday.
All arrivals to New Zealand – including its citizens – will have to self-isolate after restrictions were introduced on Monday morning. Prime minister Jacinda Ardern said the government had the power to enforce self-isolation which it would use if people proved reluctant. Anyone arriving from the Pacific Islands is exempt. The country's national airline carrier, Air New Zealand, is also slashing 85% of its international flights in the next few months.
Police have been fining cyclists in Spain after the country imposed severe limits on public life as the coronavirus death toll more than doubled. The government's official death toll rose by 152 to 288 on Sunday. The number infected rose by 2,000 new cases to 7,753.
A British athlete has told the Guardian the International Olympic Committee must act decisively by postponing the Tokyo 2020 Games because of the impact of the pandemic. Guy Learmonth, who captained the GB team at the European Indoor Championships last year and is hoping to be picked in the 800m, has become the first British athlete to warn that going to Tokyo in July is not worth the risk.