Labour calls for better coronavirus protection for UK armed forces
John Healey says number of tests on frontline personnel should be made public
The shadow defence secretary called on the government to do "everything it can" to protect the British armed forces from coronavirus – and make public the number of times service personnel have been tested for the disease.
John Healey wrote to the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, amid concerns about a lack of transparency with the British military and after serious outbreaks of the respiratory disease on US and French warships.
"Coronavirus is showing again how our armed forces help keep us safe. It is vital the government does everything it can to keep them safe too," the Labour MP wrote in a letter shared with the Guardian.
The Labour spokesman asked why the UK "does not publish data on testing of military personnel, whereas other countries such as the US do", and demanded that Wallace make testing – and its results – widely available.
A growing number of soldiers, currently about 3,000, are helping carry out a number of frontline tasks in the UK, including 200 working in the ambulance services, as well as assisting the emergency delivery of protective equipment, oxygen and ventilators for hospitals.
Soldiers placed on standby have  complained  they are being housed in confined barracks conditions, where social distancing measures are not always practised, particularly during exercises and in training.
The MoD has so far refused to make public how many coronavirus tests it has undertaken, or how many personnel have tested positive. Three weeks ago, sources said there had been fewer than 10 cases, but that figure is well out of date.
An MOD spokesperson said: "We welcome dialogue on the important work of Armed Forces during this global crisis, and how to keep them safe while they do their vital job.
"The safety and wellbeing of our people is of the utmost importance and we have issued advice in line with the guidance from PHE and the NHS. We keep our advice and procedures under constant review."
Nearly 600 sailors serving onboard the USS Theodore Roosevelt aircraft carrier tested positive for coronavirus – one of whom died – after an outbreak got out of control in the confines of the warship.
About 40 cases of coronavirus were detected last week onboard the French aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle, which had been taking part in Nato exercises in Denmark with Royal Navy ships.
Healey asked in the light of "the concerning reports" involving the US and French warships if Wallace would "postpone large-scale training exercises" where social distancing could not be practised to avoid similar outbreaks.
Armed forces personnel dealing with members of the public suspected of being ill with coronavirus should also have appropriate personal protective equipment, he added, asking if Wallace would spell out what equipment was available to soldiers deployed alongside or in partnership with paramedics and other NHS workers.
Wallace has been a relatively low-profile minister during the coronavirus crisis. After spending a week in self-isolation in March suffering from symptoms of the disease, he returned to work at the beginning of April saying he had recovered from his illness, although he did not take a test to confirm he had been infected.
The defence secretary met his Nato counterparts in a special video conference on Wednesday afternoon to discuss how the military alliance can respond to the coronavirus crisis. Ministers discussed the importance of Nato continuing its core function of western defence while member countries were also deploying personnel at home.
The UK provides 800 troops to the ongoing defence of Estonia against Russia, while the RAF contributes to the air defence of the Baltic states from Lithuania. Wallace also promised to supply two experts in countering disinformation to formation of a Nato coronavirus communications hub.
It also emerged Downing Street had paused work on the planned integrated review of defence and foreign policy due to the pressing need to focus on the coronavirus crisis, according to a letter written by Alex Ellis, the deputy national security adviser, to the defence select committee.