'We clean everything': care homes help loved ones say goodbye
From PPE provision to moving relatives in, staff are trying to find a balance during the coronavirus pandemic
When a resident dies in a Hallmark care home, they aren't alone – even if they have Covid-19. Hallmark is one of a number of care homes determined not to condemn their residents to virtual goodbyes or farewells through a window.
It takes effort and innovation but Julie Rayner, compliance director and infection control lead at the medium-sized chain with homes across England and Wales, is determined that no family needs to be separated at the moment of death.
"We ensure that families are supported to continue to visit if a resident is at the end of their life, no matter what their cause of death will be," she said. "Infection control risks can be safely managed by identifying the safest route in and out of the home, checking the temperatures of those entering the home, handwashing and provision of PPE."
"Infection control precautions are key," she added. "We have family members one at a time. They put on PPE equipment as soon as they enter the home and wash their hands. They're then escorted through the home and can stay with their loved one for 15 minutes.
"They then change out of their PPE equipment and wash their hands in the resident's room. The old PPE equipment is left in the resident's room and a new set is put on. The new set is worn only until they reach the front door of the home, then they take it off and wash their hands again. We then go back along the route they took and clean everything, from the buttons to handrails to the inside of the lift, if they took it."
Her comments came as the health secretary, Matt Hancock, announced proposals to allow people to be with relatives in care homes who are seriously ill with coronavirus before they die so they can fulfil their "right to say goodbye".
Rayner isn't alone in her determination to take whatever meticulous care is needed to enable families to say a proper goodbye. Adam Purnell, the manager at Kepplegate, an independent home, has set aside a room near the entrance of the building for those needing end-of-life care to reduce traffic around the home. "We fill the room with all their personal items and photos," he said.
"Something else we do is offer [to let] relatives move in. We are currently taking things on a person-by-person basis."
But the quality director at a large UK chain said while they were "working hard to enable loved ones to keep in close contact with residents living with us", they increasingly found themselves "policed by some family members and members of the local community when it comes to visits and PPE".
"It's a very challenging time and so we focus, as we always do, on getting the balance right," she added.
Raina Summerson, the chief executive of Agincare, a medium-sized care home provider, also finds the balance hard: "Letting family to the bedside of residents is an incredibly difficult call to make for managers. They're scared of being accused of creating an outbreak or not managing it.
"We have incorporated family members into the care home as part of our volunteer teams: they move into the home and care for their loved one as well as others in the home," she said. "Where possible, we have an end-of-life room by the front door, so family can visit without going through the rest of the home. Or we use ground-floor rooms with patios, so family don't have to go through the home at all to get to their relative's room."
But she added: "We have found ourselves criticised by public and staff from other services and primary care for aiding people to come into the homes to spend time at end of life. One complaint, for example, was that it was a waste of PPE."
Romaine Lawson, the operations manager at Apple House Care, a learning disability specialist group, said: "We have a general 'no visitors' idea across our homes but we operate by looking at each case on its own.
"We involve the loved one, their family and the whole multidisciplinary team in any decision we make, which means we take the full responsibilities of decisions away from one single person. We all work together to protect each other, putting safety and their commitment to the work we do above personal needs."