Care homes in England say coronavirus death toll has risen to 1,400
Figure far outstrips official total of 217 as testing finally begins for staff and residents
We would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died from Covid-19. You can get in touch by filling in the form below, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your contributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss further.
Figure far outstrips official total of 217 as testing finally begins for staff and residents
The death toll among people being looked after in care homes in England has risen to 1,400, care leaders have said, as NHS England and the Care Quality Commission finally started rolling out testing of staff and residents.
Care England, which represents the largest providers of care, said on Wednesday reports of confirmed and suspected deaths from several of the big networks showed the number of deaths was continuing to rise. Last week it estimated the death toll was below 1,000.
Coronavirus has been identified in about half of care homes in Scotland, operators say. Outbreaks have killed dozens in homes in Glasgow and Dunbartonshire, and there have been further deaths in Wales, where 81 care homes have cases.
The death toll starkly contrasts with data from the Office for National Statistics published on Tuesday that said 217 people died in care homes in England and Wales up to 3 April 2020. The difference is partly based on the ONS's reliance on death certificates, which take time to be processed.
Helen Whately, the care minister, said on Wednesday the government accepted that the figures understated the scale of the problem.
"We are working really hard to make sure we do have the full picture and we do have updated data of lives lost," she said. "I don't want to speculate about what numbers might be. Having robust and accurate data is really important for decision-making. ONS and the Care Quality Commission are working to get up-to-date figures."
This week MHA, one of the largest charitable providers of care homes, reported 89 confirmed and suspected Covid-19 deaths in six days, bringing its total to 210. Taken together with deaths reported by Four Seasons Health Care and HC-One, the toll for just three networks in recent weeks is rising past 620 deaths.
On Wednesday there were reports of 15 deaths at a single care home in Wavertree, Merseyside, and eight at a home in Stowmarket, Suffolk.
The Alzheimer's Society has estimated about 2,500 people in care homes could have already died. Data from Italy, Spain, France, Ireland and Belgium has suggested about half of all deaths from coronavirus could be happening in care homes in those countries, increasing fears that the UK death toll could yet rise considerably.
Prof Martin Green, the chief executive of Care England, said he had been gathering figures from care home networks of numbers of residents dying with Covid-19 symptoms, but he stressed that in some cases, with a lack of testing, it was not always easy to determine the cause of death.
"We have got to get real-time data," he said. "I want the same daily reporting structure we have with the NHS. We need to know what we are dealing with. If we see a huge spike at a particular time we can focus our agenda on support. It might identify hotspots."
But he said the introduction of testing for care homes, announced by the Department of Health and Social Care, was welcome.
"We have seen testing starting now and there is a massive logistical problem in having to make sure there is enough capacity for care home residents and care home staff," he said. "I don't underestimate the challenge but it is really good this is finally on the agenda and the government has a plan."
Sam Monaghan, the chief executive of MHA, said care operators had been desperately in need of testing for the past month and welcomed the move.
"We will be monitoring this very closely to ensure testing is accessible for our staff and residents and it is carried out and the results received in a timely manner," he said. "We have said from the outset that the two critical factors for the care and protection of our residents and staff are the combination of testing and adequate PPE.
-tributes-and-memories
"This announcement, however, should by no means take the focus off the critical need to ensure the production and supply of PPE. As a charity we can't continue to be in a position where we are having to procure kit from the private market at heavily inflated prices because the government supply is insufficient."
Green said many care homes remained confused about how to use often limited supplies of personal protective equipment. He said this was the result of sometimes conflicting advice from Public Health England about what to use in what circumstances.
