Drum rolls, bread rolls and rolling wheels - the upside of lockdown
Community projects put positive spin on lockdown amid coronavirus pandemic
It is heart warming to see every aspect of society transformed to join the effort against coronavirus, with Harry Potter buses turning into NHS shuttles, an old red phone box becoming a food hub, and an ancient water mill brought back into action to tackle the flour shortage.
Also in today's daily round up of positive news, a BBC weather forecaster brings joy to viewers with his epic drum performance.
Weather forecaster goes viral with BBC News drum solo
A BBC weather forecaster working from home has delighted social media users after posting a video of himself playing the programme's outro music on a drum kit.
Owain Wyn Evans, who presents the weather on BBC North West, shared a clip on Twitter showing him finishing his presenting slot and dashing into the house to bang out a beat to the theme tune.
"When they said try working from home, I didn't realise they'd expect me to do the music too," Evans joked.
The clip has been viewed over a million times, collecting more than 50,000 "likes".
Wyn Evans said: "We are all trying to find ways of keeping our spirits up during this difficult time of lockdown, and it is great that this has proved such a hit. The tune itself is obviously a bit of a banger anyway, and I knew it would sound brilliant on the drums."
One viewer commented: "THIS IS EVERYTHING. You've won Wednesday 15 April, 2020. Congratulations." Another replied, "Wednesday? Owain just won the first half of 2020 ... maybe the whole of 2020!!"
Harry Potter buses for free NHS transport
Magic-themed buses, which used to transport visitors to and from the Harry Potter studio tours in London, have been repurposed as free transport for NHS staff.
The elaborately decorated buses were lying out of action after the coronavirus lockdown led to the closure of the Warner Bros Studio Tour. The coach company Golden Tours decided to donate the vehicles for NHS use.
"We are delighted to announce that Golden Tours buses, usually used to shuttle sightseers to the Warner Bros Studio Tour London, will now be used to safely transport key workers to and from the hospitals," the company said. "We couldn't be happier to help the wonderful and hardworking NHS staff in any small way we can."
The buses will take staff between Watford General, St Albans City and Hemel Hempstead hospitals in Hertfordshire, with on-board social distancing rules maintained at all times.
Paul da Gama, from the West Herts hospitals NHS trust, called the move a "wizard idea", adding: "Our workforce has been depleted due to sickness or self-isolation and so it's really important that those staff who are well, but have transport issues, can come back."
Village in Scotland turns phone box into community larder
A disused red phone box has been transformed into a mini food hub, stocking groceries and other essentials for residents struggling with the coronavirus lockdown.
Muthill, a village in Perth and Kinross, Scotland, is home to 675 residents. Corinna Robertson and Susan Crawford decided to set up the "take what you need" service after realising just how badly the lockdown had hit some people.
"We realised this is worse than we thought. People are off work and have no income and it'll take a while for them to get money through," said Robertson, a 52-year-old garage worker who was recently furloughed.
The larder, which was set up on 9 April, is particularity useful for those who cannot drive and who might struggle to get to the nearby town of Crieff to stock up. "The response has been incredible. The local pub, which no longer has income, donated chocolate Easter lollies for kids," she added. "It's great community spirit."
They have even considered keeping the hub open after the lockdown finishes to help people get back on their feet. "People might be in this predicament for a while, being behind with bills."
Water mill helps tackle flour demand
A water mill on the River Stour in Dorset, which Thomas Hardy used to enjoy visiting, has gone back into commercial production to help meet the demand for flour.
Sturminster Newton Mill, usually a working museum producing a small amount of flour for tourists, has milled a tonne of wheat in 10 days – usually the amount it processes over the entire visitor season. It has sold the wheat to local bakers and grocers.
Imogen Bittner, the miller, said: "We were due to open on 28 March and had already bought our grain for the season. Without visitors we'll be taking quite a hit but this will help to make up for a bit of the lost income. It's not only helping us but the local community because there is a shortage of flour."
There is thought to have been a mill on the spot since Saxon times. Thomas Hardy spent 21 months in the village and worked there on his novel The Return of the Native. He and his first wife, Emma, went for walks to the mill.
Tour de France champion's garage cycling
On Wednesday, the former Tour de France champion Geraint Thomas began a 36-hour "ride" in the garage of his Cardiff home to fundraise for the NHS.
Thomas is intending to complete the fundraising challenge on a high-tech static bike in three 12-hour sessions, representing the demanding shifts of NHS workers.
The cyclist set up a bank of screens to record the details of his ride and communicate them. He also has a screen for a Netflix feed. He was being sustained by messages of support, plus coffee and Welsh cakes.
Within a few hours he had reached his target of £100,000 for NHS Charities Together – but kept pedalling on.
He said: "Like everyone around the country I have been humbled by the hard work, bravery and professionalism of the NHS. I was chatting to Sa [his wife] to see what we could do to show our support for all the frontline workers so I'm doing the only thing I know how to do and getting on my bike."