Shakespeare, pub quizzes and rainbows: the upside of lockdown
There are sparks of joy amid the gloom as people across the country try to lift one another's spirits
We are living in unprecedented times and across the country people are coming together in unprecedented ways – whether it's through the power of social media, art or Shakespeare.
Unable to attend his usual pub quiz after the coronavirus lockdown came into effect, Jay Flynn decided to organise a virtual quiz with his friends through a Facebook event – when he checked back a couple of days later, over 30,000 people had signed up.
"I'm not very good at social media and I'd set it public by mistake," he explained. "It's just mad."
Flynn, who previously hosted his own pub quiz and worked as a pub landlord, now runs The Virtual Pub Quiz live every Thursday evening, with 155,000 tuning into the last one.
"It's intimidating knowing that it's live to 150,000 people - there's some cable TV shows that don't get that," said the 38-year-old, who lives in Darwen, Lancashire. "I'm just about getting used to it now but it's still overwhelming when you see the numbers."
Seeing just how big his audience had become, Flynn encouraged his players to donate money, and has already raised over £93,000 for the NHS, with many people making other donations to local charities too.
He's now introducing a live quiz on Saturday nights too, and is recruiting NHS workers and celebrities to join in and ask some questions.
With theatres across the country closed, residents in north London decided to bring Shakespeare to their homes with an across-street performance of Romeo and Juliet.
Ruth Gibson and Ché Walker who live opposite each other in Hampstead and both work in theatre, took on the roles of the star-crossed lovers, acting out the balcony scene.
Meanwhile, Adolfo Berstein, a neurologist who also lives on the street, provided a score using a saxophone, flute and cymbal.
At the end of the performance, people applauded from their homes and the street where they had gathered to watch.
Posting a video of her performance, Gibson tweeted: "This is how we do lockdown in NW3. Entertaining the neighbours (all audience members must be 2m apart)."
The first batch of medical gowns and scrubs made by luxury lifestyle brand Barbour have been distributed to hospitals in north-east England.
The South Shields-based outdoor clothing company, which has Royal Warrants to supply the Queen, Prince Phillip and Prince Charles, switched its production to making personal protective equipment for NHS staff on the frontline.
Lewis Atkinson, deputy director of the Queen Elizabeth hospital in Gateshead, tweeted: "Much excitement at receipt of our first batch of 'by royal appointment' gowns from Barbour - thank you so much, we especially love the proper Barbour cuffs!"
"Fantastic to see how the whole region is working together to support NHS."
Barbour, which turned its factory over to making military garments during both world wars, is also supplying gowns to the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle and other north-east NHS Trusts.
The company chairman, Dame Margaret Barbour, said: "Everyone has a role to play in fighting Covid-19 and I wanted my daughter Helen and I to play our part by turning our South Shields factory over to produce PPE product for the NHS.
"Our staff's welfare is our most important priority and we have undertaken a strict risk assessment to ensure we adhere to social distancing and that they are fully protected whilst undertaking this important role."
A group of neighbours in south-west London came together to turn their street into a "Rainbow Road" in support of NHS staff and other key workers.
Artist and art teacher Karen Iredale Lucas, who lives on the road in Teddington, challenged the street to decorate their houses with bright colours and rainbows, with an Easter egg and bottle of Prosecco for the best display.
She sent an email to everyone in the street and wasn't sure whether there would be much interest, but after a couple of days the road was soon filled with colourful balloons, fairylights, chalk pavement drawings and bright window displays.
"On the day at 9.30 am, my husband and I stepped out with our artwork, having only had one other response," said Lucas. "I didn't know whether anyone else would actually do it. But by day three the road was full of rainbows."
"I am very proud of the community, and pleased that people are so grateful to the workers that are still keeping us safe," she added. "It reminds people that although we're in isolation, we're still part of one community."
She's hoping the initiative will catch on, and others try to brighten up their streets with some rainbows and colour. "Why not have rainbows across all of Teddington, or across the whole of London?" she said.