'Are people dispensable?': care home manager tells how third of residents have died from Covid-19
Easter weekend brings a 10th coronavirus death at Wren Hall in Nottinghamshire, where staff feel they are 'fighting a losing battle'
Easter weekend brought despair rather than joy for Anita Astle, manager of the Wren Hall nursing home in Nottinghamshire. When she finished her shift on Sunday evening the suspected Covid-19 death toll among her residents had already reached nine. She had lost more than a third of the people she refers to as "family" to the highly contagious virus. Bedrooms were standing empty and staff were feeling "broken inside". Then, on Easter Monday, she woke to news of a 10th fatality.
"When is it going to end?" she said by phone to the Guardian in tears shortly after hearing the news. "I left the building at 8.30pm and he died at 8.55pm. It is just soul destroying. We have deaths normally, but they are good deaths. We have the family around the person."
Such is the danger of contagion that the only solace they could offer the family of one recent victim was for them to be present in the care home's car park as his body was removed by undertakers at 11pm.
The ordeal of Wren Hall is not unique. Stanley Park care home in County Durham lost its 13th resident to the virus on Monday. Twelve people have died at a home in Cranhill, Glasgow, eight at another in Dumbarton, 13, 11 and 15 at homes in Yorkshire, Northamptonshire and Luton. The virus appears to be sweeping through many nursing and care homes which, with their highly vulnerable elderly residents often with serious underlying health conditions, were always likely to be among the hardest hit parts of the country.
Prof Chris Whitty, the UK government's chief medical officer, told a Downing Street briefing on Monday that Covid-19 outbreaks had been recorded in 92 care homes in the previous 24 hours and that there are people with coronavirus in 13.5% of all care homes – up from his assessment of 9% last week. Some care home operators suggest it is already higher than that. MHA, which operates 131 care homes, says the virus is in half of its facilities. Early assessments of emerging data from five Spain, Italy, Belgium, France and Ireland also suggest as many as half of all victims are in care homes.
The figures, however, do little justice to the pain and exhaustion faced by the nurses, care assistants and managers who have been tackling the virus over the last three weeks.
"The first resident started with symptoms on 24 March," said Astle. "Since then we have had 19 people in isolation and four have come out of isolation. We are just having deaths all the time."
A pattern is emerging at Wren Hall of residents deteriorating rapidly after appearing to stabilise. This has meant it has been hard sometimes to get family to the home when their loved ones are on the brink.
"People pick up at day five or six and seem to be stabilising and then at day eight, nine, 10 they plummet," she said. "Their oxygen saturations fall and they have no reserves left. It is intense. We have people on oxygen, subcutaneous fluids and trying to manage temperatures with paracetamol by suppository because they can't manage orally."
A "red team" of six staff are dedicated to trying to look after the suffering in masks, face shields and aprons, and morale is taking a battering, said Astle.
"It's getting harder and harder every day," she said. "We lose somebody and it gets worse. They are trying to keep up their spirits, but it's not happening … We're fighting a losing battle."
"The families are scared," she continued. "There are families calling wanting to speak to their loved ones and wanting to Skype them, but we are also looking after people who are really ill. Sometimes you feel bad you can't give them the time they want."
She is scathing about the level of support she has received from public health authorities. Commissioners "say we're doing a fantastic job but they haven't got a clue what this job is like now," she said.
There has been "no communication with Public Health England", she said. The epidemic has been "poorly handled from start to finish".
"Are people dispensable?" she said. "It feels as if people are not worth saving. But that is certainly not how we feel."
