Online support groups for alcoholics on the rise during lockdown
Shift away from physical meetings a success apart from trolling, say organisers
The coronavirus lockdown has led to a mushrooming of online support groups for people coping with drink problems, with organisations such as Alcoholics Anonymous also having to deal with meetings being hijacked by trolls.
The response of AA and other organisations come as one leading alcohol charity said the lockdown presented a "near constant trigger" for recovering alcoholics already struggling against the way they associated home with drinking.
With the closure of all of its physical meetings, the shift online was working "extremely well" according to an AA spokesperson, who added that the organisation was running to the same format involving a fixed-duration and roles such as a secretary.
"A meeting I've just had – there were two member from outside of the UK, one from Vietnam and another in Australia," said Peter. "We have had online meetings for several years now but we anticipate that even more people will use this form of medium. A lot are saying how grateful they are."
However, AA has had to issue guidelines and advice on how to secure the popular video meetings app Zoom, and prevent sessions from being "hijacked" by what it described as "bad actors."
The guidelines, which include using online waiting rooms and taking care not to include AA in the title of meetings held virtually in public, state: "Of course, nothing prevents them from raising their hand and once called upon to start their obscene gibberish, but at least it's only one person, very easy to ban and not let back in for the rest of the meeting. Just like what happens at real meetings sometimes."
The AA warns members to expect "explicit, obscene porn, lewd images, foul language and verbal abuse (often directed at the lead/chairperson to invoke chaos). First and foremost, remain calm, having expected to experience this. Shock their primary goal. If you are calm, you can act quickly and decisively instead of react."
Ben, a pub owner from south-west England who spent a month in rehab before Christmas to try to overcome a 30-year alcohol habit, welcomed the prevalence of online forums but was concerned about reports of trolling from other users.
"I've heard about people coming into Zoom meetings, stripping naked, or opening a can of booze and just sitting there," he told the Guardian. "They communicate with each other before and then come online in massive numbers, so it's really difficult to find them and block them."
He said he had remained sober since the lockdown began, despite the challenges: "Self-isolation is the perfect excuse to have a drink. If I was drinking at the moment, I would be completely out of control. It would be something I'd really need and want, so I'd find a way to get hold of it."
Dr Richard Piper, the chief executive of the charity Alcohol Change UK, said the treatment sector had adapted very quickly to the lockdown. As well as AA, Smart Recovery, another international organisation, is recruiting additional facilitators to run temporary online meetings as the Covid-19 crisis rolls on.
"But we would still expect to see increasing challenges for people who have gone into recovery as this goes on," said Piper, who spoke of how the nature of the lockdown was heaping immense pressure on people who had established new routines as part of their recoveries.
"Unfortunately, the vast majority of problem drinking relates to people who drink at home. If your home is a place that you associate with drinking then you work really hard not to associate it with that. But if you are stuck in that home, essentially what we are speaking about are constant triggers."
Michael Rawlinson, a treatment consultant at Clouds House, an addiction treatment centre, said he had seen a positive response to their recovery programme, with more frequent meetings, higher attendance and a greater geographical spread.
"We've had people accessing our online meetings from places like Chicago, people from all over the world hopping in and out," Rawlinson said. "Where we usually have 20 or 30 people, we've now got three times that amount."
But he warned: "I think we're in the honeymoon period at the moment. People are finding the Zoom meetings really new and exciting. As time progresses, I'd expect to see people's behaviours change."