Staffordshire woman dies from Covid-19 two weeks after her parents
Brother Richard MacVicar says, 'Someone has stolen my heart' after losing half his family
Three members of the same family from Burton-on-Trent in Staffordshire and two porters who worked at the same hospital in Oxford are among the latest coronavirus victims to be announced in the UK.
The official death toll of those who have died in UK hospitals after testing positive for the virus rose by 717 on Monday to 11,329. The figure covers deaths up until 5pm on Sunday.
Jayne Harvey, 62, a former crime analyst for Staffordshire police, died on Saturday, two weeks after her parents, Keith MacVicar, 84, and Jean MacVicar, 82.
Her brother, Richard MacVicar, 60, posted on social media: "To lose half your family in the space of two weeks feels like someone has cut me open and stolen my heart. So, so wrong."
Meanwhile, fundraisers have been launched to support the families of the two porters at Oxford's John Radcliffe hospital, both from the Philippines, who died over the weekend.
Oscar King Jr, 45, a "loving husband and devoted father", died on Saturday. He had worked at the hospital for more than 10 years, "always doing his job with great enthusiasm and joy", according to the Jesus Is Lord Church in Oxford.
The church has set up a gofundme page to raise money for a memorial for King and to ease the financial burden on his wife, who is also believed to be in hospital with severe coronavirus symptoms, and 10-year-old daughter.
King's colleague, Elbert Rico, died on Friday from suspected coronavirus. He had been working at the hospital since he arrived in the UK from the Philippines in 2004.
A gofundme page set up by his daughter Carla Rico said: "He was always working and would prioritise others' needs first. He would walk around the hospital with a smile on his face and very rarely would he call in sick."
The Department of Health and Social Care announced that 290,720 people had been tested in the UK as of 9am on Monday, of whom 88,621 had tested positive.
The overall death toll of those who died in UK hospitals after testing positive for the virus rose by 917 on Saturday and 737 on Sunday. On Friday, the number of deaths recorded in 24 hours stood at 980 – the highest single-day figure so far. Throughout Europe, France is the only other country to have exceeded that figure in a single day, but unlike in the UK, care home deaths are included in its data.
On Monday, research from UK-based academics showed that around half of all deaths from the virus appeared to be happening in care homes in some European countries.
According to data from varying official sources, in Italy, Spain, France and Belgium, between 42% and 57% of coronavirus-related deaths had occurred in homes. Official statistics for care homes in England and Wales are believed to hugely underestimate deaths in the sector.
On Monday, a care home in County Durham reported that 13 of its residents had died after displaying symptoms of Covid-19.
Although France, Spain and Italy have all recorded more total deaths than the UK's current tally, those countries appear to be past the peak of the outbreak, while deaths across Britain are expected to continue to rise for at least another fortnight.