Coronavirus travel updates: which countries have restrictions and FCO warnings in place?
Foreign Office advises UK nationals against all non-essential travel. Plus latest travel bans and repatriation information across the globe, updated as the situation changes
As of 23 March, the FCO has been advising UK nationals who are travelling abroad to return home immediately if commercial flights are still available.
This article was first published 28 February. It was last updated on 13 April at 1pm (GMT). The Guardian has published a new article on the countries easing restrictions around Europe, which is being updating regularly.
UK nationals who are usually based in the UKare urged to return home if possible:
"International travel is becoming very limited as air routes close, land borders close and new restrictions are put in place that prevent flights from leaving," the FCO website says. "We are working with airlines to keep routes open, and calling for international action to keep routes open to enable British people [to] return home on commercial flights. We are also working around the clock to support those British travellers who are already finding difficulties in coming back to the UK. If you are a permanent resident overseas, you should stay and follow the advice of the local authorities in the country you live in."
UK nationals who are unable to return home should follow the advice of local authorities, including local measures to help minimise exposure. This may include remaining in a hotel room or other accommodation for 14 days; being moved to quarantine facilities; being tested for coronavirus and, if positive, in some cases being admitted to hospital. Travellers with visa enquiries or visas that may soon be expiring should contact local immigration authorities in the country or the UK-based embassy.
On 30 March, the government announced it was partnering with airlines to charter flights to help bring stranded UK nationals home. Details will be published on the FCO travel advice pages and here when available. In some cases, the government may be able to offer an emergency loan to pay for flights back to the UK.
The Foreign Office (FCO) is advising UK nationals against all but essential international travel. This advice took effect on 17 March, for an initial period of 30 days, but was extended on 4 April for an indefinite period. Border closures and other travel restrictions are increasing globally.
Within the UK, the government is calling on people to avoid travelling at all unless essential.
"Essential travel does not include visits to second homes, campsites, caravan parks or similar, whether for isolation purposes or holidays. People should remain in their primary residence. Not taking these steps puts additional pressure on communities and services that are already at risk."
The following countries have travel restrictions in place that may affect UK nationals (who do not have residences in other countries). These include quarantine measures, border closures, flight suspensions, health screenings and other measures. Countries permitting entry are likely to ask travellers to present a health certificate stating that they do not have coronavirus.
* EU proposes suspension of non-essential travel
The EU has proposed that all non-essential travel be suspended to the European Union for 30 days. This would affect travel from outside the EU, but the UK would be exempt.
AlbaniaBan on entry to UK travellers, flights suspended, and borders closed. Suspension of cultural and sporting activities; ban on large gatherings; closure of restaurants and bars; shops open for limited hours; public transport limited.
Andorra, Monaco and the NetherlandsCultural and sporting activities prohibited; large gatherings restricted; restaurants and bars closed; shops open for limited hours; public transport limited. Some flights suspended.
AustriaNo direct flights between Austria and the UK, or direct air or rail connections from Austria to Italy, France, Spain or Switzerland. Transit permitted. Travellers coming from Italy by road will be stopped at the border and must present a health certificate stating that they are not affected by coronavirus. Ski resorts in Tirol, Salzburg and Vorarlberg were closed on 15 March.
AzerbaijanFlights suspended until 20 April. Mandatory quarantine for 14 days. E-visas suspended. For assistance phone +994 12 437 7878. Email info@migration.gov.az to extend visas.
BelarusUK travellers are strongly advised to return to the UK while flights are still operating – Belavia continues to operate direct flights four times a week. Self quarantine for 14 days for anyone travelling from a country with confirmed cases.
BelgiumMeasures in place until 19 April are likely to be extended until 3 May. These include: suspension of flights from outside the EU; self quarantine for all arrivals for 14 days; proof of residence and onward travel required for transit through Belgium; restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise), suspension of cultural and sporting activities; a ban on large gatherings; closure of restaurants and bars; shops open for limited hours; limited public transport.
Bosnia-HerzegovinaBan on entry to UK travellers, flights suspended and borders closed. Suspension of cultural and sporting activities; ban on large gatherings; closure of restaurants and bars; shops open for limited hours; public transport limited. Curfew in the Federation and Republika Srpska from 8pm to 5am (the latter also has a curfew from midday on Saturdays until 6pm Sundays). Sign up for email alerts on repatriation.
Bulgaria Ban on entry to UK travellers. Some flights continue to operate from Sofia to the UK. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible and . Restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise).
CroatiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Borders were closed from 19 March for 30 days. Dubrovnik airport is closed until further notice; other airports are open but travellers should contact airlines for flight status, which can change at short notice. As of 27 March, travellers still in the country will not face sanctions for overstaying conditions, but are advised to contact the nearest police station to register their continued stay to prevent complications upon departure.
CyprusBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended. Anyone going outdoors must carry a form explaining the reasons for going outdoors and present it to the police if stopped. For repatriation updates follow the embassy's Facebook and Twitter.
Czech RepublicBan on entry to UK travellers. Transit permitted – call +420 257 40 2111 (choose option 1 for English, then option 4 for consular assistance) 24 hours before travelling. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. Prague Airport remains open, but most flights suspended, including direct flights to the UK (indirect flights are likely to be limited, expensive, and subject to last-minute cancellation). A limited number of coaches running from Prague to London until 15 April. Contact the embassy for more information on +420 257 402 111.
DenmarkBan on entry to UK travellers. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. No direct flights operating from Denmark to the UK after 8 April. Flights Copenhagen and Billund airports remain open until then, with flights operating with BA from Copenhagen to London. Flights from Greenland suspended until at least 8 April. Flights to Faroe Islands severely reduced. Borders closed until at least 13 April. Restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise); ban on large gatherings; closure of restaurants and bars; shops open for limited hours.
Estonia, Georgia, Latvia, North Macedonia, Norway, Serbia and UkraineBan on entry to UK travellers. Check with airlines and transport providers whether transit is permitted before setting off. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving these countries as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. Flight schedules are reduced, some land/sea borders closed and some non-essential movement restricted.
FinlandBorders closed. Non-resident UK nationals are permitted entry for limited essential or compassionate reasons: they must provide evidence for their travel and should visit the Finnish Border Guard website for more information. Transit via Helsinki airport and sea ports is permitted with proof of onward travel out of the country.
FranceFrom 6 April, an "attestation" (certifying the reason for travel) is required to enter mainland France. Some flights suspended. P&amp;O and DFDS operating with reduced ferry services for cross-Channel routes. Eurostar is operating limited services between Paris and London. Eurotunnel Le Shuttle is operating a limited service through the Channel Tunnel for vehicles. UK nationals can still drive through France to return to the UK. Restrictions on non-essential movement until 15 April (food shopping, medical care, exercise of up to 20 minutes running or walking). Cultural and sporting activities are suspended, large gatherings banned, restaurants and bars closed, shops open for limited hours, public transport limited.
GermanyBan on entry to UK travellers. Some flights suspended and borders closed except for transit, which is permitted with proof of onward journey (confirmed ferry or Eurotunnel booking). Flights to London are available from Berlin, Düsseldorf, Frankfurt am Main and Munich, including with British Airways, Eurowings, Lufthansa and Ryanair. Restrictions to non-essential movement (food shopping, medical care and exercise) and public gatherings of more than two people are prohibited.
GreeceDirect flights from UK, Italy, Spain and Turkey suspended until 15 April initially, some indirect flights still possible. Self-quarantine for 14 days for all travellers. Cultural and sporting activities suspended, large gatherings banned, restaurants and bars closed, shops open at limited hours and public transport limited. Health screenings on arrival are likely.
HungaryBan on entry to UK travellers. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. Flight schedules are reduced, and there are restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise, with 1.5m distancing), with fines possible. Budapest airport remains open until further notice, with WizzAir and British Airways running two and one flight(s) respectively per day in both directions; and Ryanair continues to fly four times a week to London.
IcelandBan on entry to UK travellers until 17 April. Some flights suspended. Large gatherings prohibited.
IrelandFlights and ferry services continue to operate between Ireland and Great Britain. Large gatherings prohibited; restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise).
Isle of ManBan on entry to all passengers. Large gatherings prohibited; restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise).
ItalyTravel to Italy is possible for emergency reasons only. Only one airport per region will remain open (Rome Ciampino and Terminal 1 of Rome Fiumicino airport closed). Alitalia currently operates the only daily flight to the UK, from Rome Fiumicino to Heathrow. Alitalia currently operates the only daily flights from Italy to the UK.
LiechtensteinBorder closed at Schellenberg and Mauren, and open at Ruggell and Schaanwald for commuters, goods and transit. Flights operating to London from Zurich and Geneva, with British Airways, KLM and Swiss.
LithuaniaBan on entry and transit to UK travellers. Countrywide quarantine until 14 April. All commercial flights suspended until further notice. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. For urgent consular assistance call +370 5 246 2900. For repatriation updates follow the embassy on Twitter and Facebook.
LuxembourgAll passenger flights were suspended on 23 March. Restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping and health reasons). Cultural and sporting activities are prohibited, large gatherings banned, restaurants and bars closed, shops likely to be open for limited hours, public transport limited.
MaltaTravellers are advised by the Maltese government to leave as soon as possible. Air Malta is running flights to Heathrow, currently five times a week but for a limited period, subject to demand. All passenger ferries are suspended.
MoldovaBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended. Most border crossings with Ukraine and Romania closed.
MontenegroBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended and restrictions to non-essential movement, large gatherings and intercity travel. For urgent assistance, contact the embassy on +382 20 420 100.
PolandBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended, borders closed to entry and non-essential movement restricted. Hotels and short-term accommodation will be closed to new guests. To register for repatriation and assistance, email COVID.warsaw@fco.gov.uk.
PortugalLand border restrictions with Spain until 15 April (cross-border commuters and deliveries only). However, UK nationals can still drive through Spain and France to return to the UK. Flights from outside the EU suspended (and some other routes limited); all airports closed to passenger traffic until 13 April initially. British Airways and Ryanair are currently operating daily flights from Lisbon to Heathrow and Stansted. All campsites closed. Restrictions to non-essential movement. For assistance phone (+351) 808 24 24 24 (press 5 for English).
RomaniaBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights and bus and rail routes from Italy suspended, and most other flights suspended. Large gatherings banned and some public transport suspended. For repatriation updates follow the embassy on Facebook.
RussiaBan on entry to UK travellers. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. Flight schedules are reduced, some borders closed and some non-essential movement restricted. For repatriation updates follow the embassy on Twitter and Facebook.
SlovakiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Exit via road to Austria is currently permitted but there are restrictions at borders with Poland, Hungary, Czech Republic and Ukraine. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. Flight schedules reduced, land borders closed (excluding residents and those with temporary residency permits). Wearing of face masks mandatory outdoors.
SloveniaFlights suspended until at least 13 April. Passenger trains between Slovenia and Austria suspended. Land borders closed to non-residents, unless they have a health certificate stating they do not have coronavirus. Email info@british-embassy.si for assistance. Suspension of cultural and sporting activities; ban on large gatherings; closure of restaurants and bars; shops open for limited hours; public transport suspended.
SpainBan on entry to UK travellers. UK nationals can still drive through Spain to return to the UK. All borders were closed for entry from 23 March for 30 days. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. Hotels and short-stay accommodation now closed (measures do not apply to long-term accommodation, such as long-stay campsites, provided travellers can cater for themselves and do not rely on communal facilities, which will be closed). Some flights suspended. Land borders open to cross-border commuters and deliveries only. Tight restrictions on non-essential movement including exercise (food shopping and medical care only).
SwedenBan on entry to UK travellers. There are no direct flights from Sweden, Denmark or Norway to the UK, but some indirect routes remain open but limited. For urgent assistance call +46 77 33 113 13.
SwitzerlandBan on entry to UK travellers. Land borders closed to non-residents (cross-border commuters and deliveries only) and some flights restricted (residents only). Restrictions on non-essential movement (food shopping, medical care, exercise and those who can't work from home). Cultural and sporting activities suspended, ski resorts closed, large gatherings banned, restaurants and bars closed, food shops open for limited hours and public transport limited.
TurkeyBan on entry to UK travellers. Direct flights to the UK suspended. For repatriation and assistance email registerturkey@fco.gov.uk (including full name, passport number, date of birth, contact details, exact location, country of residence, health issues, dependants travelling with you and the airline you travelled with.) Land borders closed. Travellers who test positive on arrival will be quarantined in a government facility for 14 days; those who test negative must self-quarantine for 14 days. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible.
Armenia, Bhutan, Israel, Kuwait and KyrgyzstanBan on entry to UK travellers. Some flights and visa-on-arrival schemes suspended. Check with travel providers if transit is permitted before travelling.
BahrainBan on entry to UK travellers. Suspension of visa-on-arrival scheme. Self-quarantine for 14 days. No gatherings of five or more, shops closed except for food. National hotline: 444. For those unable to leave due to flight restrictions, apply for a visa extension online.
BangladeshBan on entry to travellers who have recently been in Europe. Suspension of visa-on-arrival scheme. National carrier Biman Airlines has suspended flights from Dhaka to the UK until 30 April. For urgent assistance phone +88 02 55668700 or contact the embassy via a web form.
BruneiBan on entry to UK travellers. Royal Brunei Airlines has suspended direct flights from Brunei to London – currently it is the only airline flying from Brunei, with twice-weekly flights to Hong Kong, Manila, Melbourne, and Singapore.
CambodiaVisa exemptions and visa on arrival scheme suspended until 30 April. Any travellers on a tourist visa valid from 1 January 2020 onwards, will have it automatically extended and overstay charges waived. Ban on entry to travellers who have recently been in France, Germany, Iran, Italy, Spain or the US. Land border restrictions. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible.
ChinaBan on entry and transit to UK travellers. The FCO advises against all travel to the Hubei Province. For urgent consular assistance phone +86 (0)10 8529 6600 or the FCO in London on +44 (0) 207 008 1500. Many airlines, including British Airways and Virgin Atlantic, have suspended flights to and from mainland China, other international airlines may only maintain one route to China, operating one flight per week.
Hong KongBan on entry and transit to UK travellers. Some flights suspended. Gatherings of more than four people in public are prohibited; those who do not comply risk imprisonment. Limited direct flights to the UK, and some airlines have a total suspension in place (including British Airways from 8-24 April; from 8 April, Cathay Pacific will only operate two flights a week (Wednesday and Sunday) to London. Indirect flights are also increasingly limited, and travellers should check layover destinations permit transit before travelling.
IndiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended until 14 April initially. Non-essential movement severely restricted. All visas and e-visas suspended until 15 April. Current repatriation flights include Goa to London on 14 and 16 April (register details); Goa to London (via Mumbai) on 18 April (from Goa register details; or from Mumbai register details); Amritsar to London on 13, 17, and 19 April (register details); Ahmedabad to London on 13 and 15 April (register details); Hyderabad (via Ahmedabad) to London on 17 April (from Hyderabad register details; or from Ahmedabad register details); Chennai (via Bengaluru) to London on 20 April (from Chennai register details; or from Bengaluru register details); Kolkata (via Delhi) to London on 19 April (from Kolkata register details; or from Delhi register details); Thiruvananthapuram (Trivandrum) (via Kochi (Cochin)) to London on 15 April (from Trivandrum register details or from Cochin register details); Amritsar to London on 16 and 18 April (register details). For urgent assistance use the following numbers: New Delhi +91 (11) 2419 2100; Chennai + 91 (44) 42192151; Mumbai/Goa +91 (22) 6650 2222. For future repatriation flights, contact Conqry.Newdelhi@fco.gov.uk with full names, dates of birth, passport numbers, visa status, contact details, exact location in India, date of arrival, details of planned return flight and any medical conditions.
IndonesiaBan on entry to travellers who have been in the UK, Iran, Italy, Spain, France, Germany or Switzerland in the 14 days before entry. All visas suspended until 20 April initially. Flights severely disrupted and transit options limited.
JapanVisa-on-arrival system suspended until the end of April initially. Some direct flights still scheduled with Japan Airlines and All Nippon Airways; and a limited number of indirect flights including with Qatar Airways and Air France. From 3 April, ban on entry to travellers who have been in the UK (and any of these countries) 14 days before arrival. Restrictions on non-essential movement in Tokyo, Kanagawa, Saitama, Chiba, Osaka, Hyogo and Fukuoka, until 6 May. The Japanese embassy in London can be contacted 9.30am-4.30pm Mon-Fri on 020 7465 6565. Japan's Immigration Services Agency can be contacted on +81 570 013 904 or +81 357 967 112.
JordanNo commercial flights in or out of the country, and all land and sea borders closed. Restrictions on large gatherings and non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise).
LaosBorders closed with Thailand. Thai Airlines and Thai Smile have suspended flights between Vientiane and Bangkok. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. Land border restrictions. The embassy will be posting updates via Facebook.
Lebanon All borders closed and flights suspended. Restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care); violators could face imprisonment; public and private gatherings banned; two people per car only; public transport suspended, until at least 26 April. For urgent assistance phone +961 (0)1 960800. For repatriation updates, follow the embassy on on Twitter and Facebook.
MacaoBan on entry to UK travellers. Limited indirect flights available, and travellers should check layover destinations permit transit before travelling. Ferry crossings with Hong Kong suspended. Only vehicles with specific licenses permitted to use the Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macao bridge (open 6am-10pm).
MalaysiaBan on entry to UK travellers until 28 April initially, but those in the country are permitted to stay. Transit permitted through Kuala Lumpur airport, but not between terminals, so travellers should confirm before travelling. Some flights suspended. Qatar Airways currently operating some flights from Kuala Lumpur to the UK and British Airways plans to resume daily flights from Kuala Lumpur on 2 May.
MaldivesBan on entry to UK travellers. Most flights suspended. Qatar Airways intends to operate a flight from Male' to Doha on 21 April. Please contact the Qatar Airways airline office on 3334777 for further information.
MongoliaBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended. To extend visas contact the immigration office (telephone +976 1800 1882 or +976 9314 1009).
MyanmarAll commercial flights suspended from 30 March. Transit permitted through Thailand with a health certificate stating that the traveller does not have coronavirus. Travellers wishing to leave should email ReturnFromMyanmar@fco.gov.uk with full name, phone number, email and number of people wishing to travel.
NepalFlights and visa-on-arrival scheme suspended until 15 April. UK travellers aiming to return to the UK, should contact BEKathmandu.Details@fco.gov.uk, with names, passport numbers, dates of birth, exact location in Nepal and contact details. All mountaineering expeditions for spring 2020 have been suspended.
OmanBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended. UK travellers wishing to return home are advised to contact airlines to make sure demand for flights is logged. For urgent assistance phone +968 2460 9000, including to register interest for a possible flight from Muscat to UK on 10 April.
PakistanAll flights suspended. Some borders closed. Large gatherings prohibited. Travellers must present a health certificate stating that they are not affected by coronavirus, issued in the 24 hours prior to arrival. For urgent assistance contact +92 (0) 51 201 2000.
PhilippinesBan on entry to all UK travellers. Public transport suspended and limited flights. For assistance email name, location, passport number and contact details to ukinthephilippines@fco.gov.uk. For repatriation assistance phone +44(0)7537 416 127 or email ukinthephilippines@fco.gov.uk.
QatarBan on entry to UK travellers. Some flights suspended. Transit currently permitted.
Saudi ArabiaFlights suspended and borders closed. Curfew 7pm to 6am for 21 days from 23 March. Suspension of domestic flights, buses, some taxi services and trains from 21 March. For repatriation email KSA.info@fco.gov.uk with "URGENT RETURN" in the subject line, and call +966 (0) 11 481 9100 for further assistance.
SingaporeBan on entry and transit. Currently there are direct flights scheduled with Singapore Airlines three times per week (Monday/Thursday/Saturday); and indirect flights with Qatar Airways continue to fly between Singapore and the UK via Doha. UK travellers who wish to leave are advised to consider doing so as soon as possible.
South KoreaThe FCO advise against all travel to the cities of Daegu, Cheongdo and Gyeongsan, which are designated as "special care zones" following a high number of cases. Self quarantine for 14 days for all arrivals. Transit permitted. Korean Air continues to operate direct flights to the UK; British Airways will suspend its direct service from 12th April; and indirect flights to the UK transiting via a third country are also available.
Sri LankaNo new visas being issued, but those currently in the country can extend visas until 12 May. National curfew in place. Sri Lankan Airlines are running flights until 18 April, and Qatar Airways are operating reduced service. National helpline for tourists: 1912.
Taiwan Ban on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended until 30 April. Face masks mandatory on all public transport. The embassy is posting updates on its Twitter and Facebook.
TajikistanAll flights suspended from 20 March. Somon Air is due to organise a flight from Dushanbe to Frankfurt – to register interest, contact airline rep Firuz Davlatov on +992 908 085 666 and the British Embassy at consular.dushanbe@fco.gov.uk.
ThailandBan on entry to UK travellers from 26 March. Contact the British Embassy for letters to support visa extension applications for use at the immigration office (usually not required for the first extension). Fights suspended until 19 April. For flight information email Thailand.Registrations@fco.gov.uk with full names, dates of birth, passport numbers contact details, exact location, nearest airport and arrival date. National curfew from 10pm-4am from 3 April; some land border restrictions.
TurkmenistanBan on entry to UK travellers. Borders closed and flights suspended until 20 April.
UAEBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended. For repatriation assistance contact uaeconsular.escalations@fco.gov.uk or 04 309 4444/02 610 1100, with full names, passport numbers, visa status (resident or tourist), contact details and current circumstances. Travellers who could not leave the country owing to the closure of borders will receive support, including permission to stay (further details to be announced).
UzbekistanBan on entry to UK travellers. Air and sea borders closed. Self-quarantine for 14 days. Face masks mandatory when outside.
VietnamBan on entry to UK travellers. Email Flight.Enquiries@ukinvietnam.com for a flight on 14 April (Phnom Penh to Hanoi to London). Most other flights suspended, with new flights announced on the embassy's Twitter – currently some flights operating from Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi via Qatar, Japan and South Korea. Limited taxis but some private hire cars available, with an airport transfer facilitation letter (available from @UKinVietnam or email support@fcowebmail.gov.uk). No new visas being issued for 15-30 days, and 14-day quarantine for all travellers entering Vietnam. Restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise) until 15 April. Face masks mandatory.
AnguillaSea and airports closed for 14 days from 20 March. Self-quarantine for travellers who have been outside the Caribbean region within the 14 days prior to arrival.
Antigua &amp; Barbuda Ban on entry to UK travellers. VC Bird airport closed to international arrivals on commercial flights, but departures will be permitted to repatriate tourists. All seaports closed from 27 March for 14 days.ArgentinaBan on entry to UK travellers. Borders closed and nationwide quarantine until 26 April initially. Flights suspended.Travellers still in Argentina are advised to find secure accommodation and email returnfrom.argentina@fco.gov.uk to register for repatriation, including full name, passport number, date of birth, current location in Argentina and contact details. For urgent consular assistance call +54 11 4808-220.
Aruba, El Salvador, Montserrat, Saint Helena andSaint Maarten Ban on entry to UK travellers. All borders closed. UK travellers who wish to leave are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, to ensure travel plans can be met.
BahamasBan on entry to UK travellers. Airports and seaports closed until 30 April. Email ukinthe.bahamas@fco.gov.uk to register for assistance, including name, contact details and exact location. Curfew until 8 April, which may be extended.
BarbadosMandatory quarantine for 14 days. National 24-hour curfew from 3 April. Flights suspended. Supermarkets closed until further notice; village shops remain open, but are subject to limited hours. For urgent assistance phone +1 246 430 7800.
BelizeBan on entry to UK travellers. Borders closed and flights suspended for 30 days from 21 March. Curfew from 8pm to 5am. For updates on repatriation email contact details to returnfrombelize@fco.gov.uk. For urgent assistance phone +501 822 2146 and select option 2. United Airlines' flight from Belize City to Houston originally scheduled for 14 April now postponed until 16 April – email unitedbelizesales@united.com or WhatsApp message to +501 614-2613 for more information.
BermudaBan on entry to UK travellers from 20 March. No incoming passenger flights from LF Wade airport for two weeks.
BoliviaBan on entry to UK travellers. Email lapaz.escalations@fco.gov.uk for assistance and repatriation enquiries. All flights suspended until 15 April initially. Land borders closed. Non-essential movement severely restricted.
BrazilBan on entry to all travellers from 23 March for 30 days. Direct flights suspended (likely to be for the first three weeks of April) and land borders closed. Some indirect routes to the UK are still operating with Air France, KLM and Lufthansa.UK travellers who wish to leave are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, to ensure travel plans can be met.
British Virgin IslandsAll airports and seaports closed until 24 April initially.
CanadaBan on entry to UK travellers. Only Toronto Pearson, Montreal Pierre Elliott Trudeau, Calgary International Airport and Vancouver International airports are operating international flights. US border closed to non-essential travel from 20 March. UK travellers who wish to leave are advised to consider doing so as soon as possible, to ensure travel plans can be met.
Cayman IslandsBan on entry to UK travellers. International passenger flights suspended for three weeks from 22 March. UK travellers who wish to leave are advised to consider doing so as soon as possible.ChileLand and sea borders closed and flights suspended. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. Overstaying a visa could affect your departure. For repatriation news follow the embassy on Twitter and Facebook.
ColombiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Airports closed and international flights suspended from 23 March. Restrictions on non-essential movement until 13 April initially. Land and sea borders closed. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible.
Costa RicaBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended. Email Consular.CostaRica@fco.gov.uk to register for repatriation and assistance. For urgent assistance contact the embassy on (+506) 2258 2025 or the tourism institute for issues including accommodation, on +506-2299-5827 or by WhatsApp message at +506-8628-3247. British Airways are not scheduled to resume flights to/from Costa Rica until 27 June 2020. There is a French repatriation flight on Wednesday 15 April with some available seats for UK nationals – email Consular.CostaRica@fco.gov.uk asap for more information.
CubaBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended. Travellers staying in casas particulares may be moved to hotels; those in hotels will be confined to the hotel. Restricted services and hours in restaurants and bars; public transport between regions suspended and other urban routes likely to be affected; restrictions to non-essential movement, particularly in Havana. For urgent assistance phone +53 7 214 2200.
CuraçaoBan on entry to travellers. Curfew all day for two weeks from 29 March.
DominicaFlights suspended and borders closed. For urgent assistance phone 1 246 430 7800. Curfew 6pm to 6am Monday to Thursday, and all weekend.
Dominican RepublicAir, land and sea borders closed from 19 March. Travel over municipal borders prohibited. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. Restrictions on non-essential movement ( except food shopping, medical care and exercise). Cultural and sporting activities prohibited; large gatherings banned; restaurants and bars closed; shops likely to be open at limited hours and public transport limited. For assistance and repatriation enquiries email UK.inDominicanRepublic@fco.gov.uk.
EcuadorBorders closed. All flights suspended until at least 30 April. All travel to Galapagos suspended and all national parks closed until further notice. For anyone wishing to leave the Galapagos, register online. Restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise). Curfew in place from 2pm to 5am.
GuatemalaBan on entry to UK travellers. All land, air and maritime borders are closed. Public transport suspended. Curfew 4pm-4am. Email Consular.Guatemala@fco.gov.uk to register for repatriation and assistance. For urgent assistance phone (502) 2380 7300.
GrenadaBan on entry to traveller who have been in the UK 14 days before arrival (and on also on travellers who have been to Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iran, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland or US)
GuyanaAll international flights suspended from Cheddi Jagan airport at Timehri and Eugene Correia airport at Ogle. Land borders closed. For information on upcoming flights email returnfrom.guyana@fco.gov.uk, with names, passport details, dates of birth, exact location in Guyana, and contact details. For urgent consular assistance phone 00592 226 5881.
HaitiBan on entry to UK travellers. All borders closed. Curfew 8pm to 5am. For repatriation and assistance email details to UK.inDominicanRepublic@fco.gov.uk, or for urgent matters phone +1 809 472 7111.
HondurasBan on entry to UK travellers. Curfew 24 hours a day until 12 April. All borders closed and flights suspended. Email Consular.Honduras@fco.gov.uk for repatriation enquiries and assistance.
JamaicaBan on entry to UK travellers. All borders closed. UK travellers who wish to leave are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, to ensure travel plans can be met. Email kingston.consular@fco.gov.uk for assistance. Kingston to London Gatwick flights likely to resume on 1 May with British Airways.
MexicoSome flights suspended. Large gatherings restricted. Land border with US closed from 21 March to all non-essential traffic for 30 days.
NicaraguaSome flights suspended. Aeromexico flights currently operating to Mexico City, with connections to London on 19 and 26 April. Domestic airline La Costeña appears to be operating as usual. Border restrictions with Costa Rica and Honduras. National helpline: 123.
PanamaBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended until 22 April. National curfew between 9pm and 5am – travellers should not leave their accommodation outside of these hours. Closure of commercial and leisure establishments, restrictions on entry to supermarkets and public transport limited. For repatriation assistance BEPanama.CV@fco.gov.uk.
ParaguayBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended. To register for repatriation and assistance, send your contact details, by email to UKinParaguay@fco.gov.uk. Restrictions on non-essential movement (ie food shopping and medical care only). Closure of commercial and leisure establishments, restrictions on entry to supermarkets; and public transport suspended.
PeruBan on entry to UK travellers. Land and sea borders closed and air travel limited. There is one flight due on 15 April (£250pp), book here for Lima to London, and here for Cusco to London via Lima, or call CTM on +44 20 7429 9725. For repatriation assistance email help@fco.gov.uk for alerts and follow @UKinPeru on Twitter. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. Restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, exercise and medical care).
Saint Kitts &amp; Nevis Ban on entry to UK travellers. All borders closed. Flights suspended. For urgent assistance phone +1 246 430 7800.
Saint LuciaBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended and borders closed. National helpline: 311, or for urgent help contact +1 758 452 2482 (option 2). For repatriation enquiries and assistance follow the embassy on Facebook and Twitter.
Saint Vincent &amp; the GrenadinesSelf-quarantine for 14 days. Ban on entry to travellers who have been in China, Italy or Iran in the 14 days before arrival. For urgent assistance, phone (+1 784) 534 4325 or e-mail coronavirustaskforcesvg@gmail.com. Flights suspended other than a once daily flight on LIAT between St Vincent and Barbados. Seaports of Bequia, Mustique, Canouan and Union Island closed to yachts and pleasure craft.
Trinidad &amp; TobagoBan on entry to UK travellers. Some flights suspended. Restrictions on non-essential movement until 15 April (except food shopping, medical care and exercise). Visa extensions granted until 22 June (for stamps given 1 March-30 April) – email extensions.international@gov.tt. For urgent consular assistance phone +1 868 350 0444 (option 2, then option 1).
Turks &amp; CaicosBan on entry to travellers who have been in affected countries in the 21 days before arrival – a list of countries that is subject to change frequently. All airports closed.
UruguayAll flights to US and Europe suspended. Border closed with Argentina including ferries. Large commercial premises closed until further notice. For repatriation updates follow the embassy on Twitter and Facebook.
USABan on entry to UK travellers. Border with Canada closed to non-essential travel from 20 March (midnight EST). Some flights suspended. UK travellers who wish to leave are advised to consider doing so as soon as possible, to ensure travel plans can be met. Some transatlantic flights operating from JFK (New York), LAX (Los Angeles), BOS (Boston), IAD (Washington DC), SFO (San Francisco), ORD (Chicago), SEA (Seattle), MIA (Miami), EWR (Newark), and ATL (Atlanta), with flights likely to be scheduled with American Airlines, British Airways, Delta, United and Virgin Atlantic.
AustraliaBan on entry to UK travellers. All borders closed and could remain so for at least six months (to non-citizens and non-residents). Self-quarantine for 14 days. Large gatherings banned. UK travellers looking to return to the UK are advised to register on the British High Commission's registration site. Travellers with a compassionate or compelling reason to enter or transit can apply to the authorities for an exemption via an online form. Travel between most states and territories within is now restricted to essential travel only. Airlines still operating include Qatar Airways (via Doha), with one flight a day from each of Sydney, Melbourne and Perth until further notice and one flight per day from Brisbane until 15 April; and Qantas is running one flight a week from Melbourne to London from 19 April for four weeks.
Cook Islands and French PolynesiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Some flights suspended.
FijiNadi Airport will close to all scheduled flights. No connections through Australia or New Zealand. National curfew from 30 March from 10pm-5am. Flights suspended. Email SuvaCS@fco.gov.uk to register for repatriation and assistance, including name, contact details, passport number and exact location.
KiribatiBan on entry to UK travellers. Tarawa airport closed until 30 April. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult.
MicronesiaEntry restricted to those who have spent 14 days in a country without any cases prior to arrival. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult.
NauruBan on entry to travellers who have been in or transited through China, Hong Kong, Iran, Italy, Macao or South Korea in the 21 days before arrival.
New Zealand Ban on entry to all UK travellers. Domestic travel permitted for people connecting with international flights to home countries, including public or private transport. Large gatherings banned. Flights severely disrupted and transit options limited. Register for assistance with the British High Commission. Airlines currently flying to the UK include Malaysia Airlines (via Kuala Lumpur), Qatar Airways (via Doha) and Air New Zealand/Virgin Atlantic (via Los Angeles) – but check with airlines and countries if transit is permitted before boarding. Transit via New Zealand is permitted for UK travellers returning home, with a layover of no more than 10 hours.
PalauBan on entry to travellers who have been in China, Hong Kong or Macao in the 14 days before arrival.
SamoaNo connections through Australia or New Zealand. Travellers must present a health certificate stating that they are not affected by coronavirus. Ban on entry to travellers who have recently been in Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Canada, China, Czechia, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong (SAR China), Iceland, Italy, Iran, Japan, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Macao, Malaysia, Netherlands, Norway, Qatar, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Taiwan, United Arab Emirates or USA.
Solomon IslandsBan on entry to UK travellers and flights suspended.
TongaBan on entry to UK travellers. All borders closed and flights suspended until 18 April initially. For repatriation updates follow the Fiji embassy on Facebook and their Twitter (there are no consular services in Tonga itself). National curfew 8pm-6am until 17 April initially.
VanuatuAll borders and airports closed until further notice. No commercial services are expected to operate while state of emergency is in place (from 26 March for 14 days).
AlgeriaBorders closed and flights suspended. Email for further assistance: algiers.consular@fco.gov.uk. Large events banned and many public spaces and amenities closed. Curfew in place 7am to 7pm.
AngolaFlights suspended. Ban on entry to travellers who have visited China, South Korea, Iran, France, Spain, Portugal or Italy since December. There is a flight from Luanda to Lisbon on 14 April, contact: luanda@atlantidawta.com as soon as possible to book.
BeninQuarantine in allocated hotels for all travellers arriving by air. Entry and exit at border crossings will be limited to "extreme necessity". Commercial flights continue to operate.
BotswanaTemporary ban on visas for nationals from affected countries affected. Some land border restrictions.
Burundi and Guinea-Bissau Borders closed and flights suspended.
CameroonBorders closed and flights suspended. Email to register for repatriation including name, contact details, passport number and exact location to ConsularYaoundeEnquiries@fco.gov.uk, or for urgent assistance call the embassy on 00442070081500 / +237 222220545.
Cape VerdeAll sea borders closed and flights restricted.
ComorosAll airports closed. Entry restricted to those who have spent 14 days in a country without any cases prior to arrival..
CongoBorders closed and flights suspended.Email Kinshasa.Consular@fco.gov.uk for repatriation and assistance.
Democratic Republic of Congo,, Malawi and Mozambique, Togo and ZambiaSelf-quarantine for 14 days for travellers who have recently been in affected countries. Some flights suspended.
GambiaMost flights suspended. Email ukingambia@fco.gov.uk for repatriation and assistance. National helpline: 1025.
EgyptBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended with updates on new flights being published on Facebook and on Twitter.
EritreaAsmara International Airport is closed for a minimum of two weeks from 25 March, and visa entry scheme suspended. For repatriation enquiries and assistance email returnfromEritrea@fco.gov.uk or call 07 660 207 (including name, contact details, passport number, date of birth, airline and ticket number, exact location, UK address, health conditions).
EswatiniLand borders closed. Non-essential travel between towns and large gatherings restricted. UK travellers can transit through Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg.
EthiopiaLand borders closed, but some flights continue to operate from Addis Ababa Bole airport. Large gatherings and non-essential movement restricted. Self-quarantine for 14 days for travellers who have recently been in affected countries. Travellers with an onward ticket are exempt from quarantine. For repatriation assistance email returnfromEthiopia@fco.gov.uk, including name, contact details and current location. For urgent assistance contact +251 (0)11 617 0100, or from the UK 0207 008 1500.
GhanaBorders closed and restrictions on non essential movement until 27 April. Most flights suspended. UK travellers wishing to leave should travel to Accra as soon as possible, as movement within the country will become more restricted. For repatriation updates follow the embassy on Twitter and Facebook, or for urgent assistance call call + 233 302 213 250.
GuineaConakry Airport and all borders closed until further notice. Curfew 9pm-5am. For repatriation assistance email BritishEmbassy.Conakry@fco.gov.uk, including name, passport number, date of birth, current location and contact details.
KenyaBan on entry to UK travellers. All flights suspended. UK travellers needing to leave should register online for the next repatriation flight, and email details to returnfromKenya@fco.gov.uk (including name, passport number, contact details, exact location, address in the UK, details of who you are travelling with and any health issues). Face masks mandatory in public places and on public and private transport.
NamibiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Restrictions on domestic travel and non-essential movement. All flights suspended and borders closed. Lockdown of Khomas and Erongo regions until 17 April initially. For repatriation assistance email general.windhoek@fco.gov.uk, including name, passport number, date of birth, current location and contact details. For urgent assistance, including issues getting to airports, contact the British High Commission on 061274800.
Mauritius Ban on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended. UK nationals in Mauritius on a tourist visa do not need to extend their "leave to stay" period (as stamped in your passport on arrival) even if it is due to expire.
LiberiaAll flights suspended. Restrictions on movement and social distancing enforced. Quarantine of 14 days likely for travellers who have recently been in affected countries.
MadagascarAll flights suspended and ports closed until further notice. There are no viable departure options at present.
MoroccoFlights to and from UK suspended. Restaurants, bars and other public spaces closed, restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping, medical care and exercise) – all movement around the country and within towns is restricted to essential shopping or medical assistance, and requires an "exceptional movement certificate" from the Moroccan authorities. Face masks mandatory in public places, and those who do not wear one could face prosecution. Passenger ferry links between Morocco and Spain and Gibraltar suspended. Flight updates on Facebook and Twitter. Email Morocco.ConsularSupport@fco.gov.uk to register for repatriation and assistance, including name, contact details, passport number, exact location.
RwandaAll flights suspended from 20 March for initial period of 30 days. Borders closed and and restrictions on non-essential movement outside of residences, including travel between cities and districts from 21 March for two weeks.
SenegalAll commercial flights suspended until further notice.Curfew 8pm-6am, including movement restricted between regions, but excluding travel to airports with relevant travel documents. Gloves and masks mandatory while outside. Email ukinsenegal@fco.gov.uk for repatriation enquiries and assistance. For urgent help contact +221 33 823 7392.
SeychellesBan on entry to UK travellers. Some flights suspended and airports closed other than for repatriation flights. For assistance phone +248 260 0451.
South AfricaBan on entry to UK travellers. All commercial flights suspended until at least 30 April. Travellers in the country who received a stamp on arrival allowing them to stay for 90 days do not need to apply for a visa. UK travellers only permitted entry if transiting home, but there is a ban on both entry and transit to travellers who have been in China, France, Germany, Iran, Italy, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, USA or United Kingdom, since 15 March. Restrictions on non-essential movement (except food shopping and medical care). for repatriation flights visit the CTM website (£855.43pp from Cape Town and £655.50 from Johannesburg).
TanzaniaAll flights suspended until further notice. Self-quarantine for 14 days for travellers who have recently been in affected countries.ReturnFromTanzania@fco.gov.uk, including name, date of birth, UK address, current location, contact details and any health issues. For urgent help, phone +255 22 229 0000 or UK +44 207 008 1500.
TunisiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Most flights suspended and sea borders closed. For information on repatriation, contact tunisconsular.enquiries@fco.gov.uk.
UgandaBorders closed and flights suspended until 24 April. There are no viable departure options at present, so UK travellers are advised to find secure accommodation and follow the advice of local authorities. For repatriation and assistance, email details to returnfrom.Uganda@fco.gov.uk (including name, passport number, contact details, exact location, UK address, health conditions).
ZimbabweCountrywide lockdown from 30 March for 21 days.
The FCO is advising against all travel on cruise ships for passengers aged 70 years and over or those with high-risk conditions. There are widespread bans around the world on cruise ships docking or passengers disembarking.