Walkers urged to stay at home after woman rescued in Greater Manchester
Woman who injured leg on moorland despite lockdown was assisted by 18 paramedics and mountain rescuers
Walkers have been urged not to take to the hills during the lockdown after 18 paramedics and mountain rescuers were required to help a woman who sustained a leg injury on moorland over the Easter weekend.
The woman was treated at the scene at Blackstone Edge near Littleborough in Greater Manchester on Saturday night during an operation that lasted for three hours and 15 minutes.
Oldham mountain rescue team (OMRT) said its volunteers had been asked by North West ambulance service to assist after the walker sustained a lower leg injury while "out enjoying the Easter sun".
She was carried by stretcher to the team's Land Rover and driven to a roadside where she was transferred to an ambulance.
"All of this was done while following OMRT's Covid-19 protocol and observing social distancing wherever possible, as well as further time back at base disinfecting kit and making sure we're ready to respond to the next call," the organisation said in a Facebook post.
"Can we please take this opportunity to ask that people stick to government advice and STAY AT HOME."
Mountain Rescue England and Wales (MREW), which represents local rescue teams, has also recently expressed disappointment that walkers had ignored current national guidelines by travelling to national parks and other areas.
"And, it is assumed, expecting MR volunteers to risk their own lives (and those of their families and colleagues) to come to a walker's aid if called," it added.
Mike France, MREW's chairman, added: "The hills and upland areas will still be there to be enjoyed once the restrictions are lifted.
"We've seen a huge drop in the number of callouts in the past couple of weeks and we're very grateful for that. But it is vitally important that people continue to be responsible and that everyone stays at home over the Easter weekend."