Sir Kenny Dalglish latest footballing great to test positive for coronavirus
Sir Kenny Dalglish has tested positive for coronavirus while in hospital for treatment of a different infection, his family have announced.
The 69-year-old Liverpool legend was admitted to hospital on Wednesday for a course of intravenous antibiotics and, in line with current procedures, underwent a test for Covid-19 despite displaying no symptoms of the illness. The test was positive and the Scot, who remains asymptomatic, will remain in hospital for further treatment.
The former Leeds United and England centre-half Norman Hunter was also reported on Friday to be in hospital with coronavirus.
A statement released by the Dalglish family read: "Prior to his admission to hospital, Sir Kenny had chosen to voluntarily self-isolate for longer than the advised period together with his family. He would urge everyone to follow the relevant government and expert guidance in the days and weeks ahead.
"He would like to take this opportunity to thank the brilliant NHS staff, whose dedication, bravery and sacrifice should be the focus of the nation's attention at this extraordinary time.
"He would also ask that they are given the space to do their jobs during what is an extremely challenging time for them and that his own family's privacy is respected. He looks forward to being home soon. We will provide further updates as and when it is appropriate."
Dalglish made his name playing for Celtic, winning the Scottish title and the Scottish Cup four times each, before joining Liverpool in 1977. He remained at the club until his shock resignation in 1991, going on to win eight English league titles, initially as a player and then from 1985 as manager, as well as three European Cups, four League Cups and two FA Cups. He also managed Blackburn to the 1995 Premier League title and won the League Cup again back at Liverpool in his second spell in charge. He played for Scotland 102 times, scoring 30 goals.