'We haven't had time to grieve': care homes struggle as Covid-19 deaths rise
UK's largest provider says 10% of all staff are self-isolating as lack of PPE and testing takes toll across sector
We would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died from Covid-19. You can get in touch by filling in the form below, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your contributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss further.
UK's largest provider says 10% of all staff are self-isolating as lack of PPE and testing takes toll across sector
The coronavirus has blown like a storm through Julie Roche's Buckinghamshire care home. In less than three weeks, eight of her patients with dementia died in quick succession.
In a home normally filled with music and dancing, her shocked and frightened staff only had an hour to adjust between the first person being diagnosed and their death. They isolated the other residents but the virus had already been transmitted. Now relatives of the dying must say goodbye by phone or through bedroom windows, the solace of touch made impossible by fear of contagion.
The only option for the wife of one dying man was to stand close to his window in the care home's car park with her daughter and granddaughter. She passed Roche a bottle of her perfume in the hope of making one final connection with her husband.
"She asked me to put it under his chin so hopefully he could smell it," Roche said. "They came, said their goodbyes and told him it was OK to go now. I could see it broke his wife's heart."
Others hand in cards for carers to read to loved ones before they die. "We do it, we cry," Roche said.
The nurse of 39 years' experience said she has never seen anything like this. The home she manages is part of MHA, the UK's largest charitable provider of care accommodation, which operates 133 care facilities. This week it granted the Guardian exclusive access to witness its response to the pandemic.
In common with much of the rest of the care sector, energy, commitment and hope are being poured in by workers who often see residents as "extended family". But efforts are being hampered by a chronic lack of personal protective equipment and testing, which has led care leaders to complain they are being treated unequally as resources and attention are poured into the NHS.
MHA's experience reveals how the impact of Covid-19 on care home residents is far greater than official statistics so far show. It says there are cases of suspected or confirmed Covid-19 in just over half of its facilities and, by Wednesday, 121 residents and one staff member had died. Funeral directors are being asked to drive coffins past the windows of homes and pause on the way to crematoria so friends can bid farewell.
In one home for people with dementia in Yorkshire, nearly three out of four residents are believed to have the virus, although none have yet died. Thirteen people have died in another Yorkshire home and 11 in a home in Northamptonshire. Few, if any, of these losses have been officially counted. Public Health England's daily figures only chart hospital deaths, while the Office for National Statistics this week reported just 20 suspected Covid-19 deaths in care homes for the whole of England and Wales in a week. MHA is not alone among care home operators in feeling that the gravity of what they and their clients are facing has not yet been recognised.
Meanwhile, MHA treats the outbreak like the emergency it is, convening daily bronze, silver and gold command meetings modelled on emergency service disaster responses. On Wednesday, for the 11.30am silver command meeting, the charity's senior managers gathered via a Zoom conference call over a digital dashboard of the latest figures charting the spread of the virus and the organisation's resilience.
The chief executive, Sam Monaghan, began with news that staff at a home in Falmouth had made a pact to move into the facility as soon as the first case was confirmed and had their suitcases ready.
Quickfire situation reports revealed that 14 of the homes were facing supply problems, including running out of PPE; in London and the south-east, 213 staff were not at work through illness or self-isolation; five homes in another area had run out of hand sanitiser; a colleague in the south-west had been admitted to intensive care, and there had been two more deaths overnight in the Midlands and north-west England.
The team dealt with it all, briskly arranging to redeploy supplies, discussing solutions such as ride-sharing for staff and the need to focus on the number of residents recovering from suspected Covid-19 – nearly 30% so far.
On the call was MHA's director of chaplaincy, Chris Swift, who oversees a network of chaplains for MHA. He has been lighting a candle in the window of his home every Sunday evening to show "that even in darkness the light of human love and compassion continues to shine". But it is getting harder for his team to get close to residents in their final hours.
As the call wound up, discussion turned to a claim on Tuesday by Prof Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, that just over 9% of care homes have cases of Covid-19. "If we are saying around half in our homes, I would be very interested to know where he is getting his figures from," said Monaghan.
The team were briefed that MPs near homes struggling with shortages of PPE would be asked to help drum up supplies over Easter weekend. Schools and factories are being asked to donate PPE, too.
Afterwards, Monaghan explained his frustration about both the lack of protective equipment and testing for the virus.
"What I don't understand is that we have the capacity to convert the ExCeL [centre in London] into a 4,000-bed hospital and we can deploy our manufacturers to make ventilators, but why hasn't our manufacturing industry been deployed to produce PPE? [Having] full kit or testing would enable our staff to feel more assured and be better able to respond. It's difficult to know what the quantum of lives saved would be."
-tributes-and-memories
That frustration is felt across the care sector, where PPE supplies are constantly under pressure. Consignments of 300 face masks that have been delivered from government supplies are of limited use. A home with 70 residents and one suspected case of coronavirus would use that number in a single day, managers say.
The GMB union, which represents care sector staff, has said workers are "terrified of turning up to work".
The crisis is taking a toll on MHA's 7,000 staff. Eighteen have confirmed cases of Covid-19 but more than 700 are in self-isolation. Monaghan believes that with testing, a large number of those could be back at work and many want to be.
"We have been asking for testing from the outset and it is only now appearing as a dot on the horizon," he said. "We don't think we are going to get it until at least the end of April and possibly May. We have been trying to manage a situation without the tools we need."
By then, Julie Roche and her team might be over the worst. "Some of these residents we have lost, we have looked after for years," she said. "It will hit us at some point. We are on automatic. We haven't had time to grieve. Once we get through this we will sit and reflect and deal with it."