Raab says he has not spoken to PM since hospital admission
First secretary of state says Boris Johnson is in good spirits in intensive coronavirus care
Dominic Raab has said he has not spoken to Boris Johnson since the prime minister was admitted to hospital, but insisted the government continued to function smoothly.
Giving an update on Johnson's health at Thursday's coronavirus briefing, Raab said: "He is still in intensive care but he continues to make positive steps forward, and he is in good spirits."
Johnson has been described as sitting up, but he has not been playing any role in government decision-making while he receives treatment at St Thomas' hospital in London.
Asked if he had been in contact with the prime minister, Raab said: "Not yet. I think it's important, particularly while he's in intensive care, to let him focus on the recovery. We in the government have this covered.
"I chaired the Cobra meeting that I've just come from. We're pursuing all the different strands of our strategy to defeat the coronavirus, and I'm confident we'll get there."
Johnson was taken into hospital on Sunday after his coronavirus symptoms, including a cough and a high temperature, persisted.
He was moved into intensive care on Monday evening. The government has said he has not been put on a ventilator but has continued to receive "standard oxygen treatment".
Johnson tested positive for the virus on 27 March, but continued to work while isolating himself in Downing Street, including chairing meetings by video-link.
The home secretary, Priti Patel, told Talk Radio on Thursday that at the virtual cabinet meeting a week ago, pictures of which were released to the media, it was evident to colleagues that he was continuing to experience symptoms.
"It was clear he was unwell, and needed to get rest and recuperation," she said.
Johnson tested positive on the same day as the health secretary, Matt Hancock, and and the chief medical officer for England, Chris Whitty, also announced he was experiencing symptoms.