Doctor who pleaded for more hospital PPE dies of coronavirus
Abdul Mabud Chowdhury wrote on Facebook asking PM to better equip NHS workers
We would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died from Covid-19. You can get in touch by filling in the form below, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your contributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss further.
Abdul Mabud Chowdhury wrote on Facebook asking PM to better equip NHS workers
A hospital consultant has died from the coronavirus weeks after pleading to the prime minister for more personal protective equipment for frontline staff.
Abdul Mabud Chowdhury, a consultant urologist at Homerton hospital in Hackney east London, died after spending 15 days in Queens hospital, Romford.
Last month he wrote a Facebook message to Boris Johnson outlining the urgent need for PPE for frontline staff and calling for testing for healthcare workers to be fast-tracked.
He wrote: "Dear and respectable prime minister Mr Boris Johnson, Please ensure urgently PPE for each and every NHS health worker."
He told Johnson that healthcare workers "are in direct contact with patients" and have a "human right like others to live in this world disease-free with our family and children".
Philip Glanville, the Labour mayor of Hackney, hailed Chowdhury as a "hero" who died serving the borough. In a tweet he added: "I hope his death wasn't as a result of continuing issues around testing &amp; PPE, but it raises Qs. A sobering reminder of the lives being lost to keep us safe &amp; the contribution BAME staff make."
Chowdhury, who was born in Bangladesh, was 53 and had no underlying health conditions.
The Muslim Doctors Association said it was "deeply saddened" by his death. In a Facebook post it said: "He leaves behind his wife and two children. Our thoughts and prayers are with them."
-tributes-and-memories
Chowdhury is the latest doctor from a BAME background to die from coronavirus.
Others to have been named include:
Dr Edmond Adedeji, an A&amp;E doctor at the Great Western Hospital in Swindon
Anton Sebastianpillai, a consultant geriatrician who trained in Sri Lanka and died in Kingston hospital just over two weeks after completing his last shift there.
Dr Alfa Saadu, 68, a retired medical director born in Nigeria, who had been volunteering at his local hospital in Welwyn.
Amged el-Hawrani, a 55-year-old ear, nose and throat consultant of Sudanese descent who was working at Burton hospital near Derby.
Adil el Tayar, a 63-year-old surgeon from Sudan, who died after volunteering in A&amp;E departments in the Midlands.
Dr Habib Zaidi, 76, a general practitioner with Pakistani origins, who died after showing "textbook symptoms" of the virus.