Discharged UK prisoners with Covid-19 symptoms given travel warrants
Some of the released men had been in quarantine with inmates who had tested positive
Discharged prisoners who have either tested positive for Covid-19 or shown symptoms of the illness have been given travel warrants to use on public transport to return to their homes, the Guardian has learned.
The prisoners had been quarantined, some in shared cells, as part of a strategy known as "cohorting", which came under fire after the Guardian revealed the practice last week.
A source at Wandsworth prison has told the Guardian that several prisoners who were discharged after completing their sentences last week had been held in quarantine after either testing positive or showing symptoms.
They said legally the men had to be released because they had finished serving their prison sentences. But they expressed concern that there had been no discussions about how to safely transport prisoners home after release.
The prisoners were issued with standard travel warrants for use on public transport, along with a standard £42 discharge grant.
The source said some of the men in this category had shared cells with inmates in the cohorting area of the jail.
HMP Wandsworth is also receiving prisoners from other jails who had tested positive for Covid-19. A prisoner from Isis prison in London was transferred to Wandsworth last Thursday.
Deborah Coles, the executive director of the campaign group Inquest, welcomed the government's decision to begin releasing low-risk prisoners. However, she said: "The health and safety of prisoners and the wider community should be paramount, and this disjointed approach to release is risky to all. Prisoners must be fully supported upon release with resources allocated for safe accommodation and the necessary financial, health and welfare support."
A Ministry of Justice spokesperson did not dispute that the men were issued with travel grants, when approached with questions about their release. "We have robust and flexible plans in place and all release arrangements are determined on a case-by-case basis using public health guidance," the spokesperson said.
In another development, some prisoners at HMP Coldingley in Surrey were left to defecate and urinate in plastic bags after an automated computer system to give prisoners access to toilets malfunctioned.
A spokesperson for the Prison Service said: "HMP Coldingley is one of the few prisons where not all cells have in-cell toilets." They said the computerised system for accessing toilets was due to be upgraded later in the year.
"To ease pressure on the estate we're temporarily releasing risk-assessed prisoners and working to identify publicly owned sites to be used as temporary accommodation," they said.
The International Committee of the Red Cross has said prisons and other places of detention remain vulnerable to the spread of the coronavirus.
"Prisons are not walled off from the world when it comes to disease transmission. Viruses can enter and leave a detention facility through family visits, detention staff, delivery personnel and detainees who enter or leave when newly sentenced or going to court," said Vincent Ballon, the head of ICRC's detention unit.
"Detainee health must be protected, not only because it's the right thing to do but also for the good of wider society."