Boris Johnson 'stable' in intensive care and not on ventilator, says No 10
Downing Street says PM has received oxygen support and is in good spirits
Boris Johnson remains in intensive care on oxygen but without the need for a ventilator and does not have pneumonia, No 10 has said.
As Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, led his second daily coronavirus response meeting on Tuesday, Downing Street said at lunchtime on Tuesday that Johnson was "stable" overnight and remains "in good spirits", despite his admission to intensive care at St Thomas' hospital in London on Monday evening.
No 10 would not confirm whether the prime minister was still communicating with officials or ministers by phone or whether he was in contact with family, but said his medical team were keeping Downing Street informed.
Johnson has not spoken to Raab since Saturday, but a message was passed to the foreign secretary asking him to deputise.
Raab has not taken on full prime ministerial powers, with No 10 and Michael Gove, the Cabinet Office minister, stressing that any big decisions would be made collectively by the cabinet. He continues to work out of the Foreign Office, rather than No 10, and weekly prime ministerial meetings with the Queen have been suspended rather than passed to Raab.
No 10 said Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, is the next in line to take over were Raab to become incapacitated.
Amid concern Johnson had been working too hard through his illness, Gove said Johnson had "followed medical advice" at all times.
In his round of broadcast interviews, Gove said the prime minister was fit, enjoyed tennis and had a "zest and appetite for life", so it was "naturally concerning" how ill he was with coronavirus.
Speaking to BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Gove said: "He's not on a ventilator. He has received oxygen support and one of the reasons for being in intensive care is that he can receive any support he needs."
Hours after his comments, Gove said he was now isolating at home because a member of his family had been displaying Covid-19 symptoms since Sunday. He will not be able to take the government's daily press conference in No 10 but can still chair and attend meetings from home.
Gove said Raab would be leading coronavirus response meetings and other cabinet committees but the "prime minister always remains the prime minister".
Gove said "decisions would be taken collectively and following appropriate advice" on when to end the lockdown. "But we do have to follow the lockdown advice because, as the prime minister's case so powerfully reminds us, this disease can hit any of us and it can hit very badly."
Gove said he could not talk about who had control of the nuclear codes if the country were to come under attack because it was a national security matter.
He rejected the idea of a national unity government but said the opposition had been "exemplary" in saying members would support a united national effort to beat coronavirus. The prime minister was moved to intensive care on Monday evening. He remained conscious.
A No 10 spokesman said on Monday: "Over the course of this afternoon, the condition of the prime minister has worsened and, on the advice of his medical team, he has been moved to the intensive care unit at the hospital.
"The prime minister has asked foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, who is the first secretary of state, to deputise for him where necessary. The PM is receiving excellent care, and thanks all NHS staff for their hard work and dedication."
Intensive care beds are reserved for those who are very ill, and in the case of Covid-19, often those who need to be put on a mechanical ventilator to help them breathe. Since being admitted to St Thomas', Johnson, 55, is understood to have received oxygen through a non-invasive mask.
His pregnant fiancee, Carrie Symonds – herself recovering from coronavirus symptoms – was said to be deeply anxious about Johnson's condition.
News of his admission to hospital, 11 days after he developed a cough and high temperature, caused national and international concern, with world leaders from the US president, Donald Trump, to the French leader, Emmanuel Macron, sending their best wishes and hopes for Johnson's recovery.
Trump said on Monday: "We're very saddened to hear that [Johnson] was taken into intensive care this afternoon, a little while ago, and Americans are all praying for his recovery. He's been a really good friend. He's been really something very special: strong, resolute, doesn't quit, doesn't give up."
Shortly after the announcement, Raab appeared on the airwaves with an attempt to reassure the public, saying government business would continue. He told the BBC there was an "incredibly strong team spirit" behind Johnson and that ministers would focus on delivering the plans he had put in place.
He said the prime minister was in safe hands and receiving excellent care, and vowed that the government would bring the whole country through the pandemic.
Buckingham Palace said of the Queen: "Her Majesty has been kept informed by No 10."