Colleagues of bus drivers who died of coronavirus call for better protection
Drivers remain concerned for wellbeing as tributes paid to the nine who fell victim to Covid-19
Tributes have been paid to nine bus workers who have lost theirs lives to the coronavirus, with colleagues calling for more robust measures to protect others working in the transport system.
Two of those drivers, plus a garage supervisor, worked for bus company Metroline. Alperton bus garage driver Said Musse and Holloway driver Emeka Nyack Ihenacho lost their lives along with Paul Aheto, who worked as a supervisor at the Willesden garage.
A Metroline spokesman said: "It is with immense sadness that we can confirm that three of our colleagues have passed away after contracting coronavirus.
"We are devastated by this loss and we offer our support and condolences to the families at this incredibly difficult time.
"The safety of our employees has always been our priority and we continue to do everything we can to make sure our workforce is as protected and as safe as possible during this unprecedented time."
Nadir Nur was one of the eight bus drivers in London to die in the last few days. The 48-year-old was described as a quiet but well liked individual at his depot. He worked for HCT Group and drove the 394 bus between Islington and Hackney, and was described to be in good health before being infected.
Tributes were also paid to Rodolfo Silva who had worked for bus company Go-Ahead London. A spokesman for the company said: "We were informed on Friday morning that Mr Silva had sadly died. The cause of his death has yet to be established.
"Our thoughts are with Mr Silva's family and friends at this very difficult time. Mr Silva was a dedicated and popular member of our Waterside Way team."
The ninth bus worker was Martin Egan, who had worked as a driver in Bristol for 40 years. He died on Saturday after falling ill two weeks ago.
The Unite union's regional secretary for the south-west Steve Preddy paid tribute to Egan, describing him as a "dedicated and long-serving member of the Unite Bristol bus family".
As the news of the deaths sunk in on Monday, some drivers remained seriously concerned about their own wellbeing. One bus driver on a west London route has taken to bringing clingfilm from his own kitchen to cover perforations in Perspex screens shielding him from coronavirus infection inside his cabin.
In a letter to the Guardian on Monday, the partner of the bus worker also revealed that he takes a urine bottle with him on his journeys because unofficial toilet stops for drivers are now closed.
Eileen Hill (not her real name) said her partner, who also wishes to remain anonymous but whose status has been verified by the Guardian, even brings his own sanitiser and mask to protect himself from contracting Covid-19.
"He takes safety into his own hands," she said. "He brings his own clingfilm, mask, hand sanitiser and a huge spray bottle of Dettol. He disinfects the cab before he gets in, sprays his mask, arranges his clingfilm and opens the window as wide as it will go. With mixed reports around whether this disease is airborne, he just hopes these measures are enough," his wife said.
She continued: "The working conditions have worsened since the new rules (on self-isolation and lockdown). Now everywhere is shut, the toilets have gone too, and he has to carry his own urine bottle – a situation that's far worse for female drivers."
Hill's partner had an informal arrangement like other drivers with a local swimming pool, a snooker hall and a café on his route to go to the toilet during the journey, she said.
The bus driver's partner said he has told her that while most people are obeying the lockdown and social-distancing rules some are not.
In her letter Hill relates an incident at the weekend on his bus: "'You're late,' spits a stocky man in baseball cap, as he taps his Oyster card, tiny flecks of phlegm hitting the clingfilm my husband has used to cover the holes in the Perspex around the cab. He taps the pre-recorded message. 'It's all a hoax,' yells the man leaning closer.
"That is why my partner takes safety into his own hands. "
The TfL spokesperson stressed that it was in discussion with unions over the issues they have raised about safety and protective measures.
"We all want to ensure the greatest level of safety for everyone in the bus industry and for the critical workers who need to make absolutely essential bus journeys," she said.
Unite's representative for London bus workers John Murphy said it was "hardly surprising" that one of his colleagues was deploying his own means of protection against the virus on his vehicle.
Murphy said the union has been informed by TFL that by the middle of this week Perspex screens with full cover will be in place on all buses in use across the capital.
"I am not in the least surprised that the driver has taken these steps by himself. These protective measures should be made available to him but in their absence it is understandable and I am sure others are doing this too," he said.