Domestic abuse cases soar as lockdown takes its toll
Some charities can no longer 'effectively support' women because of lockdown and staff sickness
More than 25 organisations helping domestic violence victims have reported an increase in their caseload since the start of the UK's coronavirus epidemic.
One group, Chayn, said that analysis of online traffic showed that visitors to its website had more than trebled last month compared with the same period last year. An audit of 119 organisations by the domestic abuse charity SafeLives found, however, that even as pressure on frontline services increased, most were being forced to reduce vital services.
The groups were surveyed during the last week of March, with 26 of them able to confirm increased caseloads owing to Covid-19. Three-quarters said they had had to reduce service delivery to victims.
Most domestic abuse organisations provide face-to-face or phone support, but a quarter say they can not "effectively support" adult abuse victims owing to technical issues, inability to meet victims, and staff sickness.
A separate study highlights the plight of domestic-violence survivors. SafeLives interviewed 66 survivors, and the women were asked to score themselves from zero to 10, with 10 denoting "safe". More than half offered a score of five or less, with three saying they felt "not safe at all".
One said: "I'm in a controlling, emotionally abusive relationship and fear it could escalate due to heightened stress surrounding the current virus situation." Another added that she was having to sit in her car to get away from the perpetrator.
There is growing pressure on the government to announce emergency funding to help victims. Suzanne Jacob, chief executive of SafeLives, said: "We know the government is thinking about what extra support might be needed for victims and their families during this difficult time, and this research shows that helping services to stay afloat and carry on doing their vital lifesaving work will be key."
Hera Hussain, founder of Chayn, said: "Survivors of domestic abuse are walking on eggshells, scared of having no support if tensions escalate."
Evidence suggests that domestic abuse is likely to  increase as a result of the pandemic. In China's Hubei province, where the virus was first detected, domestic violence reports to police more than tripled during the lockdown in February.