No family at funeral of 13-year-old coronavirus victim after siblings develop symptoms
Close family of Ismail Mohamed Abdulwahab forced to self-isolate and miss boy's burial
The funeral has taken place of a 13-year-old boy believed to be the first child in the UK to die after testing positive for the coronavirus.
His immediate family, including his six siblings, were unable to attend after his younger brother and older sister began displaying symptoms of the virus. The coffin carrying the body of Ismail Mohamed Abdulwahab was lowered into the ground by four people wearing protective clothing and masks at a ceremony at the Eternal Gardens dedicated Muslim burial ground in Kemnal Park, Chislehurst. Mourners all stood apart from each other as they observed social distancing guidelines. The teenager from Brixton, south London, died in hospital in the early hours of Monday. He had tested positive for Covid-19 last Friday, a day after he was admitted to King's College hospital. He is not believed to have had any known pre-existing health conditions.
A friend of the family, Mark Stephenson, said two of Ismail's siblings had now also developed mild symptoms including a temperature and loss of taste, and were self-isolating.
Stephenson, the director of Madinah College who set up a GoFundMe appeal for the family to raise funds, said before the funeral: "Shaykh Sharif Zain will be leading the funeral and I will be delivering a short speech for the Abdulwahab family and a few close family and friends. We hope that we can send a live stream of the funeral to his mother and siblings so they can be there remotely, but they are obviously devastated that they can't be there in person again.
"It's extremely upsetting for everyone involved, but they have been very moved by the warmth and very positive messages of support from people following their appeal."Ismail's Covid-19 symptoms started on Monday 23 March. An ambulance took him to King's College hospital on 26 March and he was put on a ventilator. He tested positive for Covid-19 the following day and was put into an induced coma. He died on Monday 30 March at 3am after his lungs failed and he had a cardiac arrest.
The hospital confirmed a 13-year-old boy had tested positive for Covid-19 and died. It said there would be no postmortem.A spokesman for the trust said: "Sadly, a 13-year-old boy who tested positive for Covid-19 has passed away, and our thoughts and condolences are with the family at this time.
"The death has been referred to the coroner and no further comment will be made."The GoFundMe appeal for his family has raised more than £70,000 in three days, with more than 4,000 people donating and many leaving messages of condolence and support.