Life in Lockdown: how is your family coping?
The Anywhere but Westminster team would like your help to create the next episode of Life in Lockdown
We're putting together the next episode of Anywhere but Westminster's Life in Lockdown series. Please keep sending us video and information about how you're experiencing any aspect of the coronavirus crisis: it's essential to how we are portraying the condition of the country.
The next film will focus on family life during the crisis – the issues, pressures, problems (and comforts) people are experiencing as they live through this time alongside their nearest and dearest. We're asking for video footage, as well as any information about people, places and issues we should cover.
How does everyday family life work in the absence of school? What's it like self-isolating with your parents, or grandparents? How do a range of things, from special educational needs to visiting rights, work in these strange times? Are you separated from close family members, and how do you keep in touch? How are teenagers coping? And what of play, leisure, and time out from each other's company?
If you fancy sending some video, please shoot landscape rather than portrait. And it's hugely important that you observe the physical distancing rules.
Record a video diary of what's happening to you, but also turn your phone or camera the other way round, and give us a sense of your immediate surroundings and what's happening in them. Any flavour of people's family lives is great: what you're having to do, things that are now challenging, how your domestic life has been transformed.
If you can send us video, you can email it or use a transfer service, such as WeTransfer. If there are things we should know about, for this or future episodes, send us an email. Thanks again for everyone's work and help. We're thrilled that the idea is working.
If you want to send a video or email, use anywhere.but.westminster@theguardian.com. Or get in touch by using our encrypted form below. Only the Guardian will see your responses.
If you're having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.