All care home staff and residents in England to be tested for coronavirus
Data shows more than a quarter of deaths in care homes involve the disease
More than a quarter of all deaths of care home residents in England and Wales since the beginning of the coronavirus crisis involved Covid-19, official figures show.
The government has now announced that all staff and residents in English care homes will be tested for the virus by early June.
Data from the Office for National Statistics reveals that there were 45,899 registered deaths of care home residents in the period from 2 March to 1 May 2020, 12,526 or 27.3% of which involved the virus.
Previous figures suggested there had been 8,312 coronavirus fatalities in care homes since the outbreak began, but the new data – which includes residents who died in hospital – shows the toll is 50% higher.
The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said on Friday that 33,998 had died from the virus so far in the UK, meaning care home deaths account for at least a third.
The research found there had been a sharp increase both in deaths involving Covid-19 among care home residents and deaths not involving it. There were 73,180 care home deaths between 28 December and 1 May, 23,136 more than the same period last year.
The figures support the findings of a study from the London School of Economics published earlier this week which said the number of deaths among care home residents caused directly and indirectly by the pandemic was around 22,000, much higher than previously thought. The ONS said it was looking into the excess of non-Covid-19 deaths in care homes and would report its findings soon.
Speaking at the Downing Street press conference on Friday, Matt Hancock said the government had "tried to put a protective ring around our care homes" from the start of the pandemic, despite complaints from staff about a lack of PPE and testing. He boasted that "two thirds of England's care homes have had no outbreak at all".
The health secretary said that the government would test every care home resident and staff member in England for coronavirus by early June. He announced that local authorities – which have warned they face a social care funding shortfall of £3.5bn – must also conduct a daily review of care homes in their area to ensure they have the necessary support.
The ONS data shows Covid-19 was the leading cause of death in male care home residents between 2 March and 1 May, accounting for 30.3% of their deaths. It was the second leading cause of death in female care home residents, after dementia and Alzheimer's disease, accounting for 23.5% of fatalities.
Dementia and Alzheimer's disease was the most common pre-existing condition among care home residents whose deaths were linked to the virus and was found in 42.5% of those fatalities. Of the 12,047 coronavirus care home deaths, 89% featured at least one pre-existing health condition, with the average number of pre-existing conditions being two.
London's care homes had the highest proportion of deaths involving the virus in the four months to 1 May, accounting for 25.7% of fatalities. The south-west of England had the lowest proportion, with 12.9% of deaths of care home residents featuring Covid-19.
Of the deaths of care home residents involving Covid-19, 72.2% (9,039 deaths) occurred at a care facility, and 27.5% (3,444 deaths) at a hospital. Of all hospital deaths involving Covid-19 in that period, 14.9% were accounted for by care home residents.
The ONS defines a death as "involving Covid-19" both when a test has confirmed a person was infected and when the certifying doctor suspects they were.
The DHSC said: "Every death from this virus is a tragedy and we are working around the clock to give the social care sector the equipment and support they need to tackle this unprecedented global pandemic.
"This includes continuing to make sure millions of items of PPE [personal protective equipment] are available to care workers, using our increased testing capacity to test care home residents, staff and their families, regardless of symptoms and our new £600m infection control fund to help prevent spread in care homes."