Emergency teams condemn government's 'controlling' approach to crisis
Tories accused of withholding vital data, failing to respond to requests for guidance, and neglecting to reveal strategy
If you would like to share your stories about testing you can get in touch by filling in the form \nbelow. Only the Guardian can see your \ncontributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss \nfurther.
Tories accused of withholding vital data, failing to respond to requests for guidance, and neglecting to reveal strategy
Local emergency planning teams tasked with responding to Covid-19 say their effectiveness has been compromised by the top-down, uncommunicative and controlling approach to the crisis by central government, according to a leaked official document.
The Whitehall review, revealed by the Municipal Journal and marked "official/sensitive", found local disaster planners were deeply critical of the government, accusing it of withholding vital data and intelligence on the progress of the disease, failing to respond to requests for guidance, and neglecting to brief them on strategy and policy decisions.
It reports that the local emergency teams, called Local Resilience Forums (LRFs), feel they have been largely kept in the dark by central government officials. "Due to paucity of information and intelligence, LRFs feel isolated from national decision-making and [are] unable to effectively plan and strategise [their] response," it says.
The review concludes: "We need to learn from our experiences so far and make immediate changes; lives are at stake."
The respondents criticised the "one size fits all'' approach of the government, which they said failed to take account of local expertise. "Testing sites are a good example where one size does not fit all and local understanding/liaison with local LRFs of those differences may have provided a better service."
It criticises the government for a "uni-directional" and abrupt approach to communication that amounted to "broadcasting" rather than discussion. "The whole process so far has been peppered with surprise announcements at various tiers of government, resulting in partners being on the back foot."
It said: "Requests for tasks and information were coming out of central government and to LRF partnerships, but when questions or clarity requests were going back in to Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government or other departments, there was a long delay for answers, hindering the effectiveness of the response."
One response said: "[The centre's] requests of us are short notice, extremely disruptive, but we get on and do; when we simply ask for guidance material or insight into government thinking, we get no response."
The document is based on 1,500 responses from over 200 people from local government, NHS and fire and police services involved in LRFs – bodies set up in 42 areas of England and Wales to prepare for and respond to major incidents and catastrophic events.
The review, dated 28 April, was carried out by Nottingham Trent University academics for the C-19 Foresight working group, a cross-departmental committee tasked with monitoring the response to Covid-19.
The chair of the housing, communities and local government committee, Clive Betts, said: 'The findings of this report are entirely disappointing. This crisis has probably accentuated a way of working by central government that's always been there.
"There is a recognition that local government has done tremendously well in responding to this crisis. If local government had been involved more closely, the response to this crisis would undoubtedly have been better."
An MHCLG spokesman said: "Councils, LRFs and other local partners are doing invaluable work in their communities across the country and supported by government. They are a highly trusted community who have regular contact with ministers and officials.
"We share information from across government along with key data on a daily basis so that they can take decisions and make the appropriate plans locally to tackle the pandemic."
Adam Lent, director of the New Local Government Network, said: "This leaked report shows that the government's obsession with controlling everything and cutting out local public services has damaged the response to the pandemic."