Vexed issue of schools challenges coronavirus consensus
Unions have questioned the return plans for England – but the government is now hitting back
Boris Johnson has insisted that the government wants to build consensus in tackling the coronavirus – but agreement on what should happen next has become increasingly frayed, nowhere more so than on the vexed issue of schools.
Downing Street was determined to include target dates in Monday's 60-page Plan to Rebuild, although it admitted some measures may have to be delayed if the science recommends it.
Ministers believe that businesses and public services – including schools – will only take the necessary measures to move to the next phase if they have concrete dates to work towards. Insiders cite Matt Hancock's 100,000-a-day testing target as an example.
Nevertheless, the 1 June date for expanding the number of children being taught in classrooms and cared for by nurseries and childminders was one of the few clear announcements in Johnson's Sunday broadcast to the nation.
Teaching unions responded with anger, complaining about a lack of detailed guidance on the measures they will be expected to put into place, and insisting that the science on the risks to children and teachers be published.
To some extent, the row, which came in the same week as Keir Starmer painfully interrogated what he claimed was Johnson's failure to protect elderly care home residents at prime minister's questions, is a sign of the return of politics amid the coronavirus pandemic.
After a ceasefire of several weeks, while the virus peaked and the prime minister was hospitalised, critics of the government's handling of the crisis have felt increasingly able to make themselves heard.
The shadow education secretary, Rebecca Long-Bailey, has backed the unions' concerns, saying the government should agree to ensure that safety standards are met before more children are invited back through the gates. Now the government is starting to hit back.
Even before Johnson's statement, briefings to the Sunday papers had seen the resurrection of the "blob" – the name once given by Michael Gove to the education establishment, including teaching unions but broadly anyone who disagreed with his and Dominic Cummings's sweeping plans for reforming the sector. On Friday, Gavin Williamson, the education secretary, wrote of the need for teachers to "do their duty".
Relations with unions appear to have been less smoothly managed over this issue than other aspects of the lockdown-easing plan.
In recent weeks, unions and business groups once regarded by the Vote Leave veterans in No 10 as "remoaner" dinosaurs have found themselves sitting round the table, helping to thrash out the details of the unprecedented economic rescue, and more recently the "Covid-secure" rules for safe working.
Williamson has repeatedly insisted that he has consulted unions - but they have complained of a lack of detailed discussions of the kind that took place across industrial sectors.
Yet while they are determined to press for the 1 June date, ministers also know they need anxious parents to feel ready to send their children back into the classroom.
Friday's meeting between union leaders and the government's scientific advisers, which took place without Williamson, saw the chief scientific adviser, Patrick Vallance, promise to publish more evidence.
It was a sign that ministers realise, after successfully terrifying the nation with their "Stay Home, Save Lives" message, they now need to be in the business of reassurance.
But this week's exchanges on schools and a host of other issues suggest that whatever the scale of the crisis, the government cannot expect a free ride, either from the opposition or the public, in the days ahead.