Almost 2,000 tags bought for UK Covid-19 prisoner releases remain unused
Justice ministry said up to 4,000 inmates would be freed but so far only 57 have been released
The Ministry of Justice bought 2,000 electronic monitoring tags for prisoners released early under emergency measures that have so far seen only 57 inmates freed.
Responding to a parliamentary question from the shadow justice secretary, David Lammy, the government said it had signed a deal with two private providers, Buddi and Attenti, on 7 April and 22 April respectively.
The Ministry of Justice announced on 4 April that as many as 4,000 prisoners who were within two months of their release date and had passed a risk assessment would be freed. As of 12 May, the figure stood at 57.
The ministry insisted the end of custody temporary release (ECTR) scheme was ongoing but that it was seeking alternative uses for the surplus tags, the cost of which has not been provided.
Buddi walked away from a multi-million pound MoJ contract to tag offenders in 2014, calling the process "unproductive and frustrating". The company, which is backed by the hedge fund manager Crispin Odey, refused to hand over its intellectual property without a government guarantee that it would not be used by other companies involved in the scheme.
Responding to the government, Lammy said: "The challenges brought about in our prisons as a result of the Covid-19 crisis are unprecedented, but why has the government ordered thousands of extra electronic tags for its early release scheme when it has only released 55 extra prisoners?
"This is a reminder that the government has barely acted on the early release measures it previously said were necessary to protect the NHS and save lives.
"Labour wants the government to succeed in stopping prisons from becoming Covid-19 hotspots. It should publish the scientific advice that supports its sudden change in strategy."
The revelation comes as the MoJ announced the introduction of secure video calls at prisons and young offender institutions across England and Wales following a successful trial at Berwyn prison near Wrexham. Her Majesty's Prison and Probation Service (HMPPS) is installing the technology at 10 institutions with a wider rollout in the coming weeks.
In a written answer, the justice minister, Lucy Frazer, said: "Both contracts are for six months duration with the provision to extend by a further 18 months if required. The services of these suppliers were contracted using the government's existing Digital Marketplace G-Cloud framework and both have extensive UK and international experience in providing electronic monitoring technology.
"We are considering alternative uses for tags not required for the ECTR scheme."