Antibody test 'unlikely to be widely available' in UK any time soon
Grant Shapps calls Covid-19 test 'game-changing' but initial focus will be on NHS and care staff
Antibody blood tests to find out whether individuals have had Covid-19 are unlikely to be generally available on the NHS any time soon, it has emerged, despite continued enthusiasm from government ministers and advisers on Thursday.
At the daily Downing Street press conference, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said the antibody test could be "game-changing" if it emerged that people who had gone through coronavirus enjoyed long-term immunity.
"I think it's very exciting that there's a very, very reliable, possibly even 100% reliable, antibody test," he said.
Jonathan Van Tam, the deputy chief medical officer for England, appearing alongside Shapps, said the new Roche test would be "rapidly rolled out as soon as it is practical to do so", with an initial focus on NHS and care staff.
"I think it will be incredibly important as the days, weeks, months go by," Van Tam said, while noting that it was still unknown whether contracting the virus gave people immunity, and if so for how long.
If there was long-term immunity, Shapps said, "for sure it would be game-changing, because it would enable us to do things in terms of releasing lockdowns that wouldn't be possible otherwise."
A second major pharmaceutical and diagnostics company, Abbott, followed Roche in announcing that its lab-based antibody test had been validated by public health bodies in England, Scotland and Wales. They found that the Abbott test was between 99.73% and 100% specific for antibodies that appear in the blood as the immune system fights Covid-19 infection. The Roche test was found to be 99.81% specific and 100% sensitive.
Abbott said it had capacity to provide 5m tests each month to the UK "with immediate effect". It said in a statement that it was "working closely with the NHS and has commenced shipping to NHS laboratories to enable them to receive samples based on government direction."
But the Department of Health and Social Care appeared in no rush to take up the offer or that from Roche, which also says it can provide millions of tests to the UK.
"Antibody testing is an important part of our strategy to counter the spread of Covid-19 and to help us understand who has had the disease. In addition to the recent huge expansion of the UK's swab-based coronavirus testing capacity, we are exploring the use of antibody testing across the NHS and ultimately the wider public," said a spokesman.
"We are delighted that devices are progressing through validation, and are actively working on our plans for rolling out antibody testing and will make announcements in due course."
Underlying the cautious approach will be anxiety that individuals will seek antibody tests on the assumption that if they have had Covid-19, they will be immune and can freely mix with other people.
But scientists say it is not known whether any level of antibodies is enough to prevent re-infection, whether immunity lasts more than weeks or months, and whether people could still carry the virus and infect others.
"A positive result to a reliable antibody test will tell us if that person has encountered the virus in the past and mounted an immune response. However, it does not tell us if these antibodies will stop you getting sick from Covid-19 in the future or how long any protection generated might last – these are both factors that we do not yet know about Covid-19," said Prof Arne Akbar, president of the British Society for Immunology.
"Additionally, the immune system is extremely complex and there are lots of ways that it can generate immunity, antibodies being only one. We need to fully understand what 'effective immunity' against Covid-19 comprises to be able to better plan our response to managing the spread of this disease."
Widespread antibody testing is valuable not for what it says about individuals but in what it indicates about the epidemic more broadly – for example, how many people have been infected in different parts of the country. That could lead to lifting some restrictions earlier in some places than others.
"The key question remains about how protective antibodies (which this test detects) are in the long and short term, but now we have an accurate test we can start measuring this," said Matt Keeling, a professor of populations and disease at the University of Warwick.
"If a positive test implies immunity then this potentially offers a way out of lockdown, or at least a way of sheltering susceptible individuals from the most risky situations – eg deploying test-positive (and hence immune) healthcare workers to look after Covid-19 patients."