Wanted ads posted in drive to hire Covid-19 contact tracer 'army'
Recruiters seek home-based workers as health secretary's mid-May deadline looms
Dozens of wanted ads for contact tracers are being posted on websites, with only days to go before the government's deadline for recruiting an army of 18,000 people to find and warn those who may have been exposed to Covid-19.
People who can work from home, making phone calls to those who are infected and their recent close contacts, are being sought all over the country.
Advertisements have gone up even within the last day for contact tracers to cover Liverpool, London, Milton Keynes, Newcastle-under-Lyme and Redditch.
The health secretary, Matt Hancock, said on 23 April that the government wanted to recruit 18,000 contact tracers by mid-May. He said they should be in place by the time the NHS tracing app goes live later this month.
While the app is expected to be useful in alerting people to the possibility that they have been close to someone with Covid-19, Hancock has been told by public health experts that contact tracers are also vital.
It is said that the contact-tracing system has been outsourced to Serco, but most of the ads – for "contact tracer customer service advisers" – have been placed by recruitment agencies.
The rate for the job is just above the minimum wage, at £9.42 per hour. The call-handlers will work shifts to cover 8am to 8pm, seven days a week. The ads say it will be a "minimum 12 weeks assignment but expected to be a long-term requirement due to the current pandemic".
One ad, posted by the recruitment agency Workforce, states: "Are you a caring, patient candidate? Are you from a customer service, care or retail background? Then we have an excellent opportunity for you."
The ad says that duties include "contacting the general public who will need to be advised on the best course of action if they have been in contact with anyone with coronavirus", and updating datasets. It suggests that candidates should "show empathy and compassion at all times" and be "flexible and determined".
The Department of Health and Social Care said it will meet the target of 18,000 contact tracers recruited when the app is rolled out later this month.
Before it was stopped on 12 March, contact tracing of those who had met up with people who tested positive was done by local public and environmental health staff, who have significant experience of finding, advising and reassuring people who may be at risk of an infectious disease.
The 18,000-strong army will include 3,000 from that skilled background, who will probably work as advisers to the call-handlers and take over the more complex or concerning cases.
Maggi Morris, former director of public health in central Lancashire, has applied to join the skilled team which is being recruited by NHS Professionals. She says they have been asked if they are willing to volunteer, rather than be paid.
"There will be an algorithm we need to follow, but we must have sufficient knowledge and understanding to get the information," she said.
"We will liaise with the initial call-handlers getting basic information. We will do followups in depth. We are also the people able to identify if there are real concerns about a more complex situation emerging."
She is happy that the contact tracing operation is starting to be put in place, "but we should never have given up on 12 March", she said. "We should really have got a grip on it then. There were thousands of us in public health and environmental health."
Former health secretary Jeremy Hunt, now chair of the health select committee of MPs, said that the app will not be sufficient and that there should be real shoe leather expended in contact tracing.
But there is no suggestion that the contact tracers will go door to door, looking for those who have socialised with somebody who is infected. Morris talks of being part of "a virtual frontline", which makes a lot of sense, she said, because of the infectivity of the virus.
Increasing testing is vital, she argued – especially in care homes, which are being allocated just 30,000 tests a week. "That really means the directors of public health will be in charge of rationing a paltry amount of testing for care homes and staff."
Another concern is for people, who may have been in contact with someone who has Covid-19, who are living in cramped conditions and are told to self-isolate.
"You are infective for two to three days before you have symptoms. That may prove problematic for people," she said.
"What about the rest of the family? Do you have a spare bedroom and bathroom? If your housing is so poor because you are sharing a bedroom and kitchen with several other families and you are in one room with three children, how do you self-isolate?