Care firm HC-One faces losing licence at coronavirus-hit Skye home
Scotland's Care Inspectorate finds concerns about quality of care at Home Farm in Portree
Regulators are attempting to seize control of a care home on Skye at the centre of a Covid-19 outbreak that has led to seven deaths and dozens of coronavirus cases on the island.
The Care Inspectorate, which regulates the industry in Scotland, said it had asked a sheriff to strip the care home's owners, HC-One, of its licence to operate after finding serious shortcomings in its management.
The facility, Home Farm in Portree, Skye's main town, has been under intense scrutiny after it emerged earlier this month that nearly all its 34 residents and half its staff had contracted Covid-19. Over the last 10 days seven residents have died, with dozens of staff sent home and told to self-isolate.
Scottish authorities have been grappling with an escalating crisis in the country's care homes, with 45% of all Scotland's 3,213 Covid-19 deaths occurring in them.
An inspectorate spokesman said that if HC-One lost its licence, new management could be installed. "An inspection has identified serious and significant concerns about the quality of care experienced by residents at Home Farm care home in Skye," he said.
"We understand this is a difficult and distressing time for residents, their loved ones and staff at the home. However, our first priority is always the health and wellbeing of residents.
Kate Forbes, the MSP for Skye, Lochaber and Badenoch, and the Scottish government's finance secretary, said she was told on Wednesday that NHS Highlands, the region's health board, had effectively taken over the running of the premises.
"The serious concerns raised by the Care Inspectorate about HC-One's management is a matter of grave importance," Forbes said. "Our oldest and most vulnerable citizens deserve the highest levels of care, and the situation at Home Farm affects everybody in the local Skye community."
A spokesman for HC-One confirmed it faced losing its licence at Home Farm. "We have accepted the shortcomings at Home Farm and apologise to our residents, their families, and the local community," he said.
"We are fully committed to making significant improvements at the home and determined to put things right. We are disappointed that the Care Inspectorate is taking the steps that it is, but we will continue to work in partnership with NHS Highland at the home to implement a robust action plan, with an unwavering focus on delivering the best possible care for residents."
Opposition parties welcomed the regulator's actions but said the outbreak on Skye, which led to a British army mobile testing team being dispatched to the island, raised fresh questions about the Scottish government's policies on care homes.
Monica Lennon, Scottish Labour's health spokeswoman, said: "The public are right to ask what took so long and has enough been done to monitor and support care homes across Scotland, which now find themselves at the epicentre of this crisis.
"Despite years of planning for a pandemic, the Scottish government has been too slow in responding to pleas from care home workers and families on testing and personal protective equipment. This must be a turning point and the first minister [Nicola Sturgeon] and the health secretary [Jeane Freeman] must ensure that every possible action is taken to save lives within care homes."
Alex Cole-Hamilton, the Scottish Liberal Democrat health spokesman, said the health secretary needed to update parliament on what had happened there. The regulator's findings were "truly devastating for worried friends and family of residents", he said.
"There are huge questions to be answered about why serious failings in care have been discovered so late on. We have known about the crisis in this home since late April. The people who live in Home Farm have been terribly let down."
Scottish health secretary Jeane Freeman said that the government's thoughts were with those affected and that she was "directly engaged with developments at the home to ensure we continue to act as necessary for the wellbeing of residents and staff."
Saying that she could not comment on the details of the case while it was before the Sheriff Court, she added: "the Scottish government strongly supports action to ensure all care homes provide a safe home for their residents and we are actively working to ensure we are doing everything possible to ensure that is the case."