Software problems thwart patient consultations with NHS specialists
Doctors frustrated by failures of Attend Anywhere system during coronavirus crisis
Thousands of patients have not been able to talk to their NHS specialist in a video consultation because software brought in to help the service cope with coronavirus has failed three times this week.
Doctors have been left frustrated by problems with the Attend Anywhere system, which is a key part of the NHS's plan to enable people who usually attend outpatient appointments to keep on seeing their doctor during the pandemic without needing to go to hospital.
Hospitals across England were affected when Attend Anywhere crashed for four hours on Monday and three hours on Wednesday and also proved unreliable on Thursday. Some hospitals now use the technology to hold more than 100 remote consultations every week.
The problems threaten to undermine NHS England's ambition that far more patients will be able to see their hospital consultant via video rather than a face-to-face consultation once the pandemic ends.
"It's immensely frustrating. I missed five new patient consultations [when it crashed] on Monday, and five more yesterday. I'm now sitting trying to start another video clinic of five new patients and the system is not working again. It's a nationwide problem," said an unnamed consultant at a major London teaching hospital on Thursday.
The failures mean that doctors have no other way of seeing a patient during a remote consultation because medics are not allowed to use Zoom, Facetime or other similar forms of communication involving video, the consultant added.
Consultations are using Attend Anywhere increasingly often to liaise with patients who have eyesight problems, mental health conditions or reproductive health issues as well as children and young people and those who have undergone a diagnostic test, including for cancer.
In a letter to seven medical royal colleges last month Hugh McCaughey, the NHS's national director for improvement, said that video consultations were a key part of the service's response to Covid-19. "Not only do video consultations help to prevent transmission of the disease, they enable both patients and clinicians, including those who are in at-risk groups or who need to self-isolate, to continue with the appointments they need."
In emails sent to hospital doctors this week, which the Guardian has seen, NHS England and NHS Improvement said the problems involved "performance issues" and "a degradation of service on the Attend Anywhere platform". It is thought that the suspensions of service were caused by the software not being able to cope with the large number of doctors seeking to use it.
Engineers fixed the problem when the first crash occurred on Monday. But when it failed again on Wednesday the NHS's national video conferencing team told medics using the software: "There are currently issues being experienced with the Attend Anywhere platform.
"The AA site has been taken down so patients will receive an error message when attempting to access waiting areas. Clinicians are also not able to log in at this time. Apologies for this disruption."
NHS chiefs have warned hospitals that it will take six weeks to get the software working reliably.
It is not known if the crashes have affected the NHS in Wales and Scotland, which also use the software for routine appointments, including GP consultations.
Graham Kendall, the director of the Digital Healthcare Council, which represents providers such as Babylon Health and Push Doctor, said: "When any system goes down it's deeply frustrating for all involved, especially patients and clinicians.
"It's fundamentally important to have reliable fallback measures in place, and that's one of the many reasons why the Digital Healthcare Council has consistently made the case for a rich ecosystem of suppliers. Having options directly mitigates the impact when things go wrong, and further encourages healthy competition so suppliers can continuously improve their systems, including incorporating user feedback.
"We need to transition away from a centrally dictated single solution as soon as possible for secondary care digital appointments. The first step towards this is to publish volume and performance metrics to inform clinicians so they can choose the best solutions that work for patients."
NHS England was approached for comment