Dentists say lockdown measures are causing 'unnecessary suffering'
Guardian hears of patients in agony as lack of PPE and high demand cause delays at urgent care hubs in England
Dentists have warned that patients are being left in extreme pain and in need of urgent treatment as emergency facilities are overwhelmed by high demand during the coronavirus lockdown.
In England, routine dental appointments were widely cancelled from 25 March to reduce the spread of coronavirus, with dentists only able to offer advice and prescriptions over the phone.
For emergency cases, patients can be referred by NHS 111 or their dentist to urgent care dental hubs at regional centres which have been set up across the England.
However, according to hundreds of accounts from dentists, dental nurses and patients submitted to the Guardian community team, a combination of high demand and a lack of personal protective equipment has caused severe delays at these hubs, leaving people with broken teeth, abscesses, and severe toothache unable to get face-to-face treatment.
Some patients are struggling to eat and sleep despite trying multiple rounds of antibiotics, and for many others existing problems are getting more serious because of the lack of treatment caused by the closure of normal dental services.
Dr Mojtaba Dehghanpour, a private dentist in Kent, said: "Toothache and earache are two of the worst kinds of pain, and people have gone on suffering for weeks. At the dental hubs, they have to prioritise the worst cases, and only treat really severe stuff that shouldn't [be allowed to] reach that level to begin with."
The regulations are making patients and dentists alike desperate, Dehghanpour said. "A friend of mine who's a dentist had severe toothache for more than a week, so he went into his practice and drilled his own tooth."
In West Sussex, Brian Haddock, 67, had to make 26 phone calls in total to his dentist, the triage dentist and an emergency hub before he was able to be seen for "unbearable pain" that had left him without sleep for two days.
When he was referred to a newly-opened hub in Brighton three days later, he was told that he needed a root canal, but as the procedure would take more than one trip to the dentist, the hub could only remove the tooth.
"It's one of my main molars I use for chewing, but in an emergency, we do things we wouldn't normally agree to," Haddock said.
Despite anecdotal evidence of hubs saying they can only remove teeth, this is not set out in their guidance given by the NHS, although it states that aerosol generating procedures should be "avoided unless absolutely necessary".
A dental nurse at a hub in Yorkshire, who asked not to be named, said her hub had been fully booked by NHS 111 patients each day and staff were unable to treat those referred by their dentists.
"We were seeing four patients a day, now we're seeing 20. There's no clear guidance on what should be worn when, and what conditions we should and shouldn't be treating. We're having to make up systems," she said.
Like many healthcare professionals, the nurse's hub has experienced critical shortages of PPE. "We've been without proper visors for two weeks. We wear gowns, masks, and reusable aprons," she said. "We remove the aprons after every patient, but not the disposable gown."
It has also been advised to check the temperatures of those entering the hub, but has not been given any thermometers.
The nurse said the situation has left her team feeling "invisible", adding that three dentists had resigned from her hub since the lockdown began because of concerns about the facility's management.
There are just 423 operational emergency hubs in England, compared with 9,000 dental practices. With hubs difficult to access, dentists have been instructed to follow a "triple A" procedure, offering advice, analgesics (pain killers) and then antibiotics.
Many dentists are worried about antibiotic over-prescription. "Throughout my dental career, I've always been told that if someone has toothache which isn't causing facial swelling or an abscess, you don't prescribe antibiotics," said Dehghanpour. "It's not effective and there are risks involved with antibiotic resistance."
Referrals for patients to be seen at many emergency hubs must come from NHS email addresses, which many private clinics do not have.
"Lots of private practices don't have [emails] set up yet, and some dentists are relying on calling up friends who do have NHS emails to refer patients for them," said Dr Elaine Mo, a dentist who works across multiple practices in London. "Some sites are much stricter than others, it's different depending on which one."
The British Association of Private Dentistry was founded in response to the government's lockdown dentistry measures. The BAPD described patient suffering as completely unnecessary, and said dentists had been operating with usual PPE for three months before the lockdown and that with a "few small enhancements", this would be enough for them to return to work.
"Our practices are rigorously assessed and evaluated by the Care Quality Commission and we are a safe environment for our patients and our teams," a spokesperson said.
The British Dental Association said dentists would be able to treat far fewer patients under what it described as the "new normal" after lockdown restrictions are eased.
"A dragging of heels in government has left an urgent care system in chaos and thousands of practices unclear if they have a future," said the BDA chair, Mick Armstrong. "The current situation is bleak."
An NHS spokesperson said: "While routine dental services were paused, as part of the overall response to reducing the spread of Covid-19, NHS dental practices have worked together with NHS Regional teams to set up urgent dental care hubs across the country, with more than 400 of these hubs already open so people can get fast care when they need it."