BBC to resume filming EastEnders and Top Gear by end of June
Production of flagship shows had been put onhold because of the coronavirus crisis
The BBC is to resume filming on flagship shows EastEnders and Top Gear next month, although stars will have to do their own hair and make-up and older actors are likely to face stricter physical distancing rules.
Charlotte Moore, the BBC's director of content, said filming on the two shows would restart by the end of June, with plans to resume production on other major BBC dramas as soon as possible.
The production of major films and TV shows has been shut down since mid-March, when the Guardian revealed that Line of Duty and Peaky Blinders, two of the most popular shows on British television, were the first UK shows to suspend filming.
"I'm pleased to announce that we plan to begin filming again on both EastEnders and Top Gear by the end of next month," said Moore, in a blogpost on the BBC website. "We're also exploring ways to restart filming on more dramas and other major BBC shows as soon as possible."
Moore said the restart of filming would follow new physical distancing guidelines being put in place by the industry following discussions with the government.
"Of course, we will be working within government guidelines," said Moore. "Crews will be strictly limited. Cast members will do their own hair and makeup. Social distancing measures will be in place.
"We want to serve our audiences and help TV production get back on its feet, but the number one priority will remain the safety and well-being of production teams and those who work with them."
It has been suggested that older actors, those more at risk of serious illness if they contract the coronavirus, may have scaled-back roles, at least when production initially resumes.
Kevin Lygo, ITV's director of television, said last month that older characters such as Coronation Street's Ken Barlow, played by 87-year-old William Roache since 1960, could be sidelined for a time post-lockdown. The character recently moved into a luxury retirement complex.
"Some people who are in a dangerous zone for age or health reasons – they won't be there, I'm sure, for a time," he said in a virtual interview for the Edinburgh TV Festival. "I don't want Ken Barlow to get sick on my watch, so we will be mindful."
ITV plans to resume shooting Emmerdale and Coronation Street, which along with EastEnders have had their number of weekly episodes rationed, "within weeks". The broadcaster has said Emmerdale will run out of episodes at the end of this month, and Coronation Street in June.