Catholic churches 'should be allowed to reopen before others'
Head of church in England and Wales cites styles of worship in argument for early reopening
Catholic churches should be allowed to reopen before Pentecostal churches, or mosques owing to their different styles of worship, the leader of the Catholic church in England and Wales has said.
Places of worship come under step three of the government's recovery strategy, meaning they cannot open until 4 July at the earliest.
But Cardinal Vincent Nichols, the archbishop of Westminster, said Catholic churches should be allowed to open for private prayer by individuals before places of worship in which large numbers of people gather.
Speaking on Radio 4's Today programme on Thursday, Nichols said: "The issues of how people are able to practice their faith are profound and sensitive, and we'd like a bit more sensitivity from the government."
The Catholic church has been creative in moving mass and other services online since the lockdown. "But there is a big, big feeling in the religious communities of wanting to get back to a fuller practice of their faith as long as we can do it safely," he said.
"I'd like to see churches available for people to go and kneel and say their prayers privately, individually and it would mean a routine of supervision, a routine of social distancing, a routine of cleansing – and all of that we believe we can do."
The government taskforce on reopening places of worship, which meets for the first time on Friday, "needs an understanding that what goes on in places of worship is quite different from one to another", said Nichols. "A personal, individual prayer in a Catholic church is not something that is much done in Pentecostal churches which tend to concentrate on big gatherings. It's not what's done in mosques, where people pray side by side. So we need a bit of differentiated thinking.
"If I could use the analogy of sport. At the moment, it's OK to play tennis with your family. In a bit, it will be OK to have a kick around with your mates in the park. It will be quite a time before we can go to formal football matches. It's all sport, but we need to differentiate. We're talking about the practice of faith but we also need to differentiate."
The Catholic church had put forward detailed proposals on how to start the process of reopening churches "step by step", he said.
Hundreds of thousands of Catholics have joined online mass. "But every single one of them wants to receive holy communion. It's a fast for us, quite a painful fast – and that's true for other faiths," Nichols said, citing the sacrifice of Muslims being unable to go to mosques during Ramadan. "There's a great deal of deep spiritual sacrifice being made."