Ministers accused of abandoning care homes to coronavirus
Government failed to shield 'most frail and vulnerable', says National Care Association chair
Ministers have been accused of having "completely abandoned" the care home sector to the threat of coronavirus, as criticism mounts of the decision to allow elderly residents to be discharged from hospital without being tested.
Nadra Ahmed, the chair of the National Care Association, said the care sector had been suffering so badly during the coronavirus crisis because of the drive to clear beds in hospitals and protect the NHS's capacity to deal with new patients.
She said the government had "completely abandoned" care homes, adding that the scientific advice it received appeared to have been wrong, given the lack of provisions to shield homes from new infections earlier.
"We understand the mantra 'save the NHS', but the concern was about the cost that it would have [in care homes]," Ahmed told the BBC's Today programme. Asked about the scientific advice the government received was wrong, she said: "It was certainly not as well put as it should have been. And perhaps yes it was wrong. Because having said we were the sector looking after the most frail and vulnerable, surely the first thing would have been how we could shield that bit of the sector."
Her comments came as housing minister acknowledged the coronavirus crisis in care homes was "absolutely terrible". The communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, told BBC Radio 5 Live: "I don't deny that what is happening in care homes is absolutely terrible. It's a huge challenge. But we are trying to put as much support as we can around care homes."
There is anger about the failure to test residents for coronavirus before they were discharged from the NHS or, if they were tested, then the results were not always available in time. A study from the London School of Economics has put the number of Covid-19 deaths among care home residents in England and Wales at 22,000, more than double the official estimate.
Andrew Lansley, a Conservative peer and former health secretary, told BBC Two's Newsnight that the government "should never have allowed patients to be discharged from hospital into care homes in circumstances where we couldn't say they weren't Covid-19 positive".
Jeremy Hunt, another former Tory health secretary and now chair of the health committee, added to criticism.
"I think the practical thing we can all see needed to have happened was to make sure that everyone discharged from hospitals to care homes was tested for Covid before they were sent to a care home. Because we didn't have the testing capacity it wasn't possible to do that," said Hunt, who had already warned of the problem in mid-March and has been calling for a ban on all visitors to care homes.
"I think in retrospect – and I have responsibility for this as someone who was health secretary for six years – because we were over-focused on pandemic flu and not pandemic Sars-like viruses we hadn't been thinking for some time about the importance of testing. Had we done that, then maybe some of these things could have been avoided," he added.
Hunt said it was "pretty clear now that it was wrong that the UK stopped testing in the community on 12 March". He added that part of the problem was the Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies being so secretive that its advice had not been scrutinised by other scientists.
Edward Argar, a health minister, defended the government's handling of the crisis in care homes but admitted that not all care home residents were getting coronavirus tests when they need them. The government has set a target of 6 June for all residents, symptomatic or not, to be able to get a test.
Boris Johnson was put on the back foot over the issue on Wednesday, as Keir Starmer used prime minister's questions to ask why Public Health England had advised in March that care home residents were "very unlikely" to become infected by Covid-19. This was PHE's position as the World Health Organization declared a global pandemic and people were already dying in the UK.
