'My rabbi's tools now include a phone': UK Jewish burials changed by Covid-19
Mourners not able to observe usual rituals, as figures suggest community being hit disproportionately
Minutes before the rabbi started intoning funeral prayers over a shrouded coffin, his phone rang. The dead man: 90 years old, a victim of coronavirus, had been lying in a morgue for a couple of weeks while the authorities and his synagogue had tried to trace his relatives.
The man was one of 440 British Jews who had died from coronavirus by Monday, a statistic that belies the impact of the virus on the Jewish community, which has been disproportionately hit by Covid-19. Figures compiled by the Board of Deputies of British Jews suggest that more than 1% of all coronavirus deaths are Jewish, while Jews are only 0.4% of the total UK population.
Now the man's grandson was on the line from Dubai. Although he had lost touch with his grandfather 30 years ago, he was able to give Rabbi Daniel Epstein valuable biographical information to supplement the man's name, age and cause of death. Even so, the only people present to witness the coffin being lowered into its grave were the rabbi and staff of Waltham Abbey Jewish cemetery, in Essex, on the edge of London.
In normal times, it is rare to conduct a funeral without mourners, but not now. The number of burials conducted by the United Synagogue Burial Society more than tripled in April, Epstein said. Some rabbis have officiated at three or four funerals a day – and in many cases, relatives and friends were unable to say a last goodbye to their loved one due to self-isolation or restrictions on travel.
"My rabbi's tools are no longer just a prayer book but also a tripod and a phone," said Epstein, who has conducted a number of funerals over Zoom.
Where Covid-19 has been the cause of death, tahara – the Jewish ritual of preparing a body for burial by washing, reciting prayers and psalms, and dressing it in a shroud – has not been performed. "We still strive to give people a dignified funeral," said Epstein, after he and cemetery staff had shovelled clods of earth into the grave, a final act customarily undertaken by relatives as a way of honouring the dead.
The Board of Deputies stressed that the full picture of Jewish Covid-19 deaths will not be known for months or even years. But it was concerned that "deaths in our community may have been at a higher level, particularly in the early stages of the UK outbreak", said a spokesperson.
The Jewish festival of Purim, on 9 to 10 March, a joyous occasion when families and friends gather to eat, drink, dance and attend synagogue, is thought to have helped spread the virus. A couple of weeks later, as the UK locked down, burial societies began reporting high numbers of coronavirus deaths.
"Back then people were joking about coronavirus. Now of course it's a totally different ball game but that was probably the most significant event, calendar-wise, prior to infections picking up," said Dan Smith, of Misaskim, which organises almost all Jewish funerals in Greater Manchester.
There have also been concerns that pockets of ultra-Orthodox, or Haredi, Jews – the fastest growing sector of British Jewry – did not heed messages in the early days to close synagogues and practise physical distancing. Haredi Jews rarely engage with the mainstream media and have limited access to the internet. Multi-generational households living in sometimes cramped conditions may have also aided the spread of the disease.
Amid reports of men congregating in synagogues, and some weddings and funerals flouting distancing guidance, community leaders in London and Manchester organised fliers in Yiddish to be posted through letterboxes and for messages to be broadcast via loudhailers from cars driving through Haredi neighbourhoods.
This week, about 300 Haredi Jews in north London celebrated the festival of Lag B'Omer with bonfires and gatherings where physical distancing was not observed, reported the Jewish Chronicle.
Since the lockdown began, Misakim has conducted some 90 burials. "Normally we average between 170 and 190 funerals a year," said Smith. "There were points during the crisis where we were doing 10 a day. A significant percentage – perhaps seven out of 10 – involved people where we were told to treat them as Covid deaths, even if it didn't say they had died from Covid on the death certificate."
Smith's father, Harold Smith, a solicitor, died in London from Covid-19 on 25 March, aged 74. Unable to attend the funeral, Smith watched the ceremony via Zoom. It was sad for such a family-minded man to be buried without all of his four children, 11 grandchildren and two great-grandchildren present, he said.
Smith then sat Shiva, the week-long mourning period for Jews, alone in Manchester. "It was just surreal. You've got seven days normally when the mourners can't go out and typically you have people coming in and out to console them. It's very much a community peer-counselling period.
"But I was alone, there was no one coming in. People made the effort to be in touch via Zoom or Whatsapp, but it was fundamentally different to the normal period of sitting Shiva."