I lost my income so started work as a hospital cleaner. This is what I have seen
I work on wards full of cv patients. It's an intimidating environment, but I'm so glad I've done it
In March I was asked to take a period of unpaid leave from my new marketing job. My financial security evaporated overnight, and I had to find another way to pay the rent. The government's announcement of the furlough scheme was a moment of relief, but it was short-lived. I was ineligible because I had started my job just after the cut-off date.
I got in touch with as many temp agencies as a Google search could muster. One afternoon I got a phone call telling me that a hospital needed cleaning staff.
Around 30 of us showed up to the induction day at the hospital. We were all in our 20s and early 30s and from a variety of different professional backgrounds. Funnily enough, most were Aussies and Kiwis, and many had come to the country just weeks earlier. What a time to arrive.
We were briefed on fire safety, infection control and cleaning routines by a woman who looked like she was juggling a hundred other important tasks. About halfway through the day, we were told some of the wards we'd be cleaning would have patients with coronavirus. This was a surprise to me, as the recruiter from the temp agency had failed to mention it. As it turned out, the news was a surprise to everyone.
After the induction ended, we were collected by an overworked-looking man and led up to a ward. In the lift he told us we were about to go on to a kidney ward where all the patients had coronavirus. Nervous smiles all round.
Initially it was intimidating, even though we had personal protective equipment (PPE). It's difficult to block out the stories you read in the media, and in an unfamiliar place, within touching distance of people with the virus, my heart was beating fast.
I spent the next couple of weeks familiarising myself with my new environment, cleaning around people with Covid-19, and getting really good at washing my hands.
A month later, cleaning around coronavirus isn't intimidating anymore. But I have the luxury of being able to keep a distance from patients.
The risk is higher for nurses. A patient with a hacking cough still needs to be cleaned and fed as much as anyone in a hospital bed. You can't wash a patient by tossing a bucket of water over them from two metres away, a nurse said to me with a wry smile.
We help out wherever needed, on wards specialising in a number of conditions and illnesses, but most are housing patients with coronavirus. The words "respiratory isolation" were printed on a green sign which hung on the door of every room with a coronavirus patient when I started. But as the hospital filled up, and the signs ran out, it became more common to see the message handwritten or typed on a piece of white paper.
Each ward has around five to 10 healthcare professionals, a housekeeper, and two cleaning staff. Full-time staff come from eastern Europe, Africa, the Caribbean, South America, Asia and the UK. These workers from around the globe make the NHS function, and despite the recent Brexit rhetoric of British exclusivity, they've all stuck around.
For those first two weeks, the hospital was busy and understaffed. You'd often see nurses sleeping in the staffroom during their lunch break, a blanket draped over them as they slumped upright in a chair. Lots of the full-time staff had to take sick leave because they had coronavirus, or showed symptoms and were isolating as a precaution.
The nurses were tired, anxious and having to adapt their lives to the ongoing crisis unfolding at work. Lots of them didn't feel safe with the PPE on offer and some altered their home routines to keep loved ones safe. On a rare tea break, one nurse told me that she kept a distance from her family at home and had to explain to her young daughter why she couldn't hug her.
Now there are signs that things are slowly improving. For the past week or two the wards have seemed less busy, and the staff less overworked. There's less of a nervous hum around the nurses' desk. Some who have been off sick have returned, which has eased some of the strain. Testing kits are now available at the hospital, and this has played a big part in allowing people to return to work.
We're not over the finishing line yet, but for us temps, shifts are beginning to be cut. Full-time staff are returning, fewer patients are on the wards, and there's no longer so much need for us. But that's OK, because there'll be some floors that need mopping or some shelves that need stacking somewhere else in London and eventually, I'll go back to marketing.
Our motley band of transient cleaners had never done anything like this before, but we've all taken a sense of satisfaction from it. At first it was daunting, but it's a job I've enjoyed doing, and it's good to feel like you're helping. It's been an experience, in exceptional circumstances, and it's one I'm lucky to have had.
If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series about experiences in healthcare during the coronavirus outbreak, get in touch by emailing sarah.johnson@theguardian.com