Pregnant healthcare worker sues NHS agency over employment rights
Lawsuit could become landmark case over contractual rights during Covid-19 pandemic
A pregnant healthcare assistant is mounting a legal action against NHS Professionals, an employment agency owned by the Department of Health and Social Care, in what could be a landmark action for other vulnerable workers bearing the brunt of the lockdown.
The mother of two, who has worked for six years at a London hospital on an agency contract, says she was sent home during the pandemic for safety reasons and has been without work or pay for eight weeks in what her lawyers say is a breach of the UK's Employment Rights Act. She was instead advised to apply for universal credit.
The case exemplifies some workers' experiences, with some employers and agencies ignoring health and safety legal protections for pregnant women, according to the charity Maternity Action, which is supporting the woman.
Andrew Hillier QC, a pro bono adviser at the South West London Law Centre, which is working for the healthcare assistant, said: "It's unacceptable that NHS Professionals, a key provider of staff to the NHS, is grossly abusing the concept of zero-hours contracts – and that experienced, committed healthcare professionals like 'Ms A' are suffering because of it."
The case comes as other frightened workers who are isolating, either to protect themselves or loved ones with underlying health conditions, have spoken of coming under pressure to return to work, in some cases at public bodies.
On the day when the government's easing of lockdown began, and increasing numbers of workers braved public transport, unions highlighted cases of key workers threatened with the sack or being put on unpaid leave.
The warning came as the takeaway firm Deliveroo was accused by a cross-party grouping of MPs of "putting thousands of people at risk" with its alleged treatment of its riders during the lockdown.
Forty-four MPs, from the former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, to the father of the Commons, the Tory MP Sir Peter Bottomley, wrote to the gig economy company to demand adequate PPE and full pay for riders contracting the virus or self-isolating with symptoms, and an end to dismissals during the crisis.
"Deliveroo couriers are low-paid, precarious workers, who are not able to self-isolate when sick or to protect their families, and clients and restaurant staff and other key workers including NHS staff are being potentially exposed to infection," they say in the letter, supporting a campaign by the Independent Workers' Union of Great Britain.
Deliveroo, which rejected the suggestion that it put profit above the safety of its riders, said: "At Deliveroo, riders are at the heart of everything we do and we are working hard to support them during this unprecedented time. This includes distributing PPE kit to riders across the UK, supporting riders financially if they are unwell, and keeping riders safe through contact-free delivery."
Separately, employers, including councils and schools, have been accused by the Unison union of using Public Health England guidance to compel frightened staff to go to work. Those involved include a school caretaker whose wife and young child are both shielding on government advice, who has not been paid for more than a month.
He said: "We feel like we're forgotten. I told my manager I'd start early or work at the end of the day to limit my exposure to the threat of the virus, because there's little chance of social distancing in a primary school – you can't stop kids sneezing and coughing – but they said no.
"We have no income and we're getting into debt. I'm low-paid anyway, so not having any money coming in is causing massive amounts of stress and anxiety."
In a letter to health secretary, Matt Hancock, the Unison general secretary, Dave Prentis, asked the government to extend the furlough scheme beyond private companies. "Through no fault of their own, some low-paid workers are having to choose between putting food on the table or protecting loved ones," he said. "Vague public health guidance is giving unscrupulous employers the wriggle room to pressure those who should really be off to go into work."
NHS Professionals said: "The first priority of NHS Professionals is always the health, safety and welfare of all our bank members, particularly those who may be vulnerable. Unfortunately, we are unable to comment on this case, as South West London Law Centres has provided no specifics, which means we are unable to investigate.
"Our policy for where one of our bank members is unable to work either because they are shielding, because they are in their third trimester of pregnancy or they are defined by Public Health England as high risk and other work cannot be found for them, NHS Professionals are paying for pre-booked shifts and then transition to an average weekly payment based on the 12 weeks prior to them notifying us they cannot work."