One in four youths with mental health issues cannot get help during lockdown
Survey finds under-18s struggling to access help from the NHS or helplines during Covid-19 pandemic
One in four children and young people with mental health problems has stopped receiving help as a result of the disruption caused by the coronavirus, new research reveals.
That has prompted concern that under-18s are struggling to get care at the same time that levels of anxiety and depression in that age group have risen sharply.
The findings have emerged from a survey by the charity YoungMinds of 1,850 parents and carers around the UK, 750 of whom have a child who had received support and treatment for mental health issues in the previous three months.
Out of those 750 parents, 25% said their child was no longer able to access help from the NHS, private providers, helplines, school counsellors or charities even though they still needed it. Many NHS mental health services are suspended or restricted, or have changed to involve mainly remote consultations by telephone or video.
"The pandemic has turned the lives of millions of children and young people upside down. Many young people are finding it hard to cope with isolation, a loss of routine, anxiety about the future, a disruption to their education, and in some cases difficult or traumatic experiences at home," said Emma Thomas, chief executive of YoungMinds.
"Despite huge efforts from mental health professionals, young people with existing mental health needs often can't get the same level of support as they had before the crisis.
"As our survey shows, many parents and carers are deeply worried about the long-term impact of the pandemic on the young people in their care, and don't know where to turn for advice and support", she added.
The results come a week after Claire Murdoch, NHS England's national director for mental health, disclosed that the number of under-18s being referred to NHS child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS) had fallen by 30% to 40% since the pandemic began.
Some of that reduction will be because schools, which make many such referrals, are closed. But Murdoch told MPs on the Commons health select committee that more parents of troubled children may be "hunkering down at home" and not wanting to seek care for their child through the usual referral routes, with some believing that help was not available.
A spokesperson for the Department of Health and Social Care said parents and troubled children should continue to seek help from the NHS in the usual way.
"We are absolutely committed to supporting the mental wellbeing of families and children, especially during these extraordinary times.
"That's why we're ensuring our mental health services are adapting to best support families and children, and recently provided £5m to leading mental health charities to help them expand and reach those most in need.
"Families and children should still feel able to contact their GP or CAMHS for support."