Covid-19 cannot be used to justify more austerity
The enormous economic costs must be paid by a fair approach to taxation, not public sector cuts and pay freezes, say Guardian readers. Plus reaction to the extension of the UK's furlough scheme
The chancellor's decision to extend furlough and offer a phased return to work is potentially a further lifeline in this crisis (Chancellor extends UK furlough scheme until end of October, 12 May). Yet we must remember that 2.5 million people in the shielded group have been told to stay at home. And they are not always receiving the support they need.
Our frontline advisers have already seen cases where vulnerable people have been denied furlough despite working in jobs that put them in face-to-face contact with others. Government guidance is clear that anyone can be furloughed, but it's just that – guidance. Unless vulnerable workers have a right to be furloughed if they can't work safely, some will continue to face the impossible choice of paying the bills or protecting their health.Gillian GuyChief executive, Citizens Advice
Owen Jones (Boris Johnson's message to the working class: good luck out there, 12 May) is right to draw attention to the stark class divisions emerging between those protected by wealth and "Zoomable" employment, and everyone else, for whom it's apparently time to get back to work. But there is an additional dimension.
It's people delivering services (public and private), and people physically making things, who cannot stay ay home and stay safe. That includes transport workers, teachers, caterers, builders, machine operators etc. These are the people who will find themselves most surveilled by "test, track and trace" systems. They are most likely to come into contact with other people.
The opposition needs to come up with radical proposals to tackle this new structural inequality. Otherwise we risk a Covid-19 version of a "Downton" world: those in service being monitored and constrained, those benefiting from their services being free to enjoy their privilege.Jane MardellLittle Bealings, Suffolk
Well before the virus is conquered and before the economic recovery is done, there will be large costs to the public purse. After 2008/09, the government's answer was austerity, with the pain being felt disproportionately by poor people and the public sector. This must not be the case after Covid-19 (Leaked report says Treasury considering cuts and tax rises, Politics live, 13 May).
Any push to cut public services and pay will be morally indefensible. There is room for changes for both business and personal taxation.
Business taxation should reflect turnover generated in this country, offset by the costs of labour and materials procured here. Personal taxation should reflect ability to contribute. Tax on holding and inheriting wealth is part of the answer, as is treating investment income similarly to earned income.
Correcting anomalies in national insurance contributions will also help. Removing the higher threshold will allow full-rate NI contributions to be collected on all income. Raising the lower threshold to well above the basic state pension will enable pension incomes to be included in the contribution assessment without harm to those who must scrape by on a minimum income.Nigel TayLee-on-the-Solent, Hampshire
Leaked Treasury documents have revealed that the Tories plan to rake back what has been spent mitigating the effects of the Covid-19 crisis by increasing income tax and raiding state pensions. Most shamefully, the likes of Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak, who have made such a great display of clapping frontline public sector workers every Thursday, plan to impose a two-year pay freeze on them. This is how the Tories reward those who have risked their lives to save lives. Workers paid for the bankers' crash in 2008. The question union leaders must now answer is: are we going to fight austerity this time?Sasha SimicLondon 