People in deprived areas of Scotland more likely to die from Covid-19
Analysis echoes ONS data confirming the disproportionate impact of the death toll
New analysis reveals that people living in the most deprived areas of Scotland are more than twice as likely to die from coronavirus as those living in the wealthiest parts.
This echoes ONS data released at the beginning of the month, which confirmed the disproportionate impact of the death toll in the poorest parts of England and Wales.
On Wednesday, National Records of Scotland (NRS) published additional analysis looking at the relationship between deprivation and coronavirus death rates. Their analysis found that people living in the most deprived areas of Scotland were 2.3 times more likely to die with Covid-19 than those living in the least deprived areas.
Guardian analysis also indicates that death rates are higher in the most deprived parts of Scotland. The death rate tends to be higher in councils that have high concentrations of deprived areas.
Inverclyde local authority, which contains a large proportion of areas in the most deprived quintile in Scotland, continues to have the highest Covid-19 death rate in the country, at 13.2 per 10,000 people, compared with the national rate of 5.8 per 10,000. Glasgow, which also has significant areas of deprivation in the city, has a death rate of 8.05 by this measure. The death rate has not been standardised for age.
The NRS analysis also found that the gap between rich and poor was smaller when considering the rate of deaths from all causes, at 1.9 times higher in the most deprived 20% than in the least deprived 20% compared with 2.3 times for coronavirus.
Dr Muge Cevik, a clinical academic specialising in infectious diseases at the University of St Andrews, described the virus as "a magnifying glass that highlights existing health inequalities".
"We know that there is a correlation between deprivation, overcrowding and pandemic hotspots. With Glasgow, we know that it is the most densely populated city in Scotland, with the lowest life expectancy and very high deprivation levels, as well as being the most ethnically diverse area of the country.
"People who face the highest deprivation also experience the highest risk of exposure and existing poor health puts them at risk of more severe outcomes".
The Guardian pressed the NRS for more detailed data, similar to that available for England and Wales, but was told that the agency was not currently planning to provide data on a lower geographic level or analysis of deprivation (SIMD) below the national level, due to the variation in deaths at smaller geographies. The NRS pointed specifically to the difficulties of calculating the necessary age-standardised rates on very small numbers.
Prof Rowland Kao, a mathematical biologist at the University of Edinburgh and expert in infectious disease dynamics, advised some caution in interpreting data that is currently available only at local authority level, noting in particular the variability within council areas between wealthier and more deprived areas.
"While it makes complete sense that there is a relationship between deaths and deprivation, the death rate is in part going to be driven by transmission, so if infection was introduced early to a particular area, then you need to account for that."
Peter Kelly, director of Poverty Alliance, said: "It's scandalous that people's life chances should be so dependent on their income.
"These figures add to mounting evidence that people already living in the grip of poverty are feeling the effects of this crisis the most. This is particularly true of women, black and minority ethnic communities and disabled people. It's crucial that action is taken in the short term to protect those being disproportionately affected, but also that – in the longer term – our economic recovery prioritises addressing the inequalities that this crisis has so exposed."