Opening of English housing market catches estate agents on the hop
Agencies scramble to work out how to do viewings after industry exempted from coronavirus lockdown
The news that the housing market in England could restart came as a surprise to estate agents. "We thought we'd be included with other retail and it would be 1 June before we could reopen," says Alasdair Dunne, head of residential at Fisher German. "Then all of a sudden it's full speed ahead."
The agency, which has 13 offices covering England and Wales, received the government guidance on how to carry out viewings at 9.30am, but had already heard from clients who had seen the news. "Some of them are really keen to get on and do things, but some are actually quite nervous," he says. "We are seeing if sellers are happy for viewings to take place. If it doesn't look feasible to do it safely, we're not doing it."
The vast majority of agency staff have been furloughed and will be brought back to work as demand increases. Dunne says most offices have received around 30 viewing requests during the lockdown – "about 70% or 80% down on usual for this time".
According to Zoopla, almost 400,000 sales have been stalled during lockdown. Around the country, agents are calling buyers and sellers to ask if they want to continue, and getting in touch with other clients to check whether they are happy for people to view their homes. Most are advising sellers to leave the property if they can, and kitting out their agents with PPE.
One estate agent in north London, Jeremy Leaf, says his agency could do viewings as early as today or tomorrow "if it is an empty property and it is clean and tidy. We're ready to go – we've got all of the PPE. If the properties and people are ready, then so are we."
Andrews, an agency with 48 branches in the south-east, says it received 226 calls about viewings and valuations within the first hour of opening on Wednesday. The inquiries covered sales and lettings.
The firm's chief executive, David Westgate, says the calls are "hard evidence of the unprecedented pent-up demand in the property market right now. People's lives have been on hold for the best part of two months and they are now rushing to get their moves back on track."
At Winkworth, which has 100 branches around the UK, the offices won't open until Monday so the agency can put safety measures in place.
Dominic Agace, its chief executive, says branches have been given guidance that they will adapt for local conditions.
"The main points are that customers will be asked to complete a health declaration before viewings and market appraisals for sales and lettings, and we will reserve the right to refuse viewings/appraisals if customers are not able to satisfy all the questions on our declaration," he says. "Sales viewings will only be carried out with buyers who can proceed with a purchase."
Agents will wear face masks and gloves while carrying out viewings, will open doors in advance and will sanitise doors and light switches before and afterwards.
John Coleman, agency director for GSC Grays, in Yorkshire, says they will not be sending their staff to do viewings of any occupied properties. "We will be providing our vendors with everything they need to do it themselves … we'll be advising them to open doors and put on lights in advance and, where possible, to be outside," he says.
However, the lettings market may be a potential problem, where usually the property is occupied by tenants, not the client. Vicky Tabiner, who runs Tabiner &amp; Co, in Leigh-on-Sea, says she will not show people around properties before June.
Dunne and Leaf say tenants will be asked if they are happy for their home to be visited. "If not, we'll just have to wait," says Leaf. Meanwhile, Coleman says his agency has decided not to show any rented properties unless they are vacant.