Three-day-old baby dies after mother catches coronavirus
Coolio Carl Justin Morgan from south Wales thought to be UK's youngest victim of Covid-19
We would like you to share your memories and tributes for those who have died from Covid-19. You can get in touch by filling in the form below, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your contributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss further.
Coolio Carl Justin Morgan from south Wales thought to be UK's youngest victim of Covid-19
A three-day-old baby died in hospital after his mother contracted coronavirus, an inquest has heard.
Coolio Carl Justin Morgan is thought to be the youngest victim of the virus. His mother tested positive for the disease before giving birth.
The baby, whose parents are from Maesteg in south Wales, was born with a low heart rate at the Princess of Wales hospital in Bridgend.
The inquest at Pontypridd coroner's court heard he was transferred to Singleton hospital in Swansea but died on 5 May.
The primary cause of death was given as severe hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy, meaning the brain was starved of blood and oxygen. Maternal Covid-19 was listed as a secondary cause of death.
-tributes-and-memories
Scientists do not yet have a definitive answer on how the virus is transmitted to newborns, said Prof Marian Knight of Oxford University, who published a study this week with her colleagues analysing data from 427 pregnant women admitted to UK hospitals with Covid-19.
"The challenge is we don't have the exact information we need yet on how and whether the virus can be transmitted to babies," Knight said.
She explained there are two possibilities: "Either the virus could be passed on to babies when they are in the womb and we've got no evidence as yet to suggest that can happen. The other possibility is if mum has an infection at the time she gives birth and it's passed effectively from contact with mum."
She added: "We don't know the answer about either of those. What we do know is that it affects a very small number of babies."
Knight's study suggests the biggest issue for newborns is not them getting infections themselves, but if the mother is infected in late pregnancy she might need to have an early birth. "There have been more problems reported because a baby has been premature than having the virus," she said. At this stage it remains unclear whether Coolio had any underlying health conditions.
The newborn is among 1,154 people to die in Wales after contracting the virus, bringing the UK death total to 33,186. His death comes less than a week after a six-week-old baby died after contracting coronavirus.
Lauren Howitt, a senior coroner's officer, told the hearing the mother was found to be Covid-19 positive soon after delivery.
The inquest was opened in Pontypridd but was adjourned to await full results of a postmortem. A full hearing is expected to be held in April 2021.
The South Wales Central coroner, Graeme Hughes, said: "I pass on my condolences to the family in these most sad and depressing circumstances"
A spokesperson for Cwm Taf Morgannwg university health board said: "While we are unable to discuss personal information relating to our patients, losing a baby is absolutely heartbreaking for any family. Our thoughts and sympathies are with them and we offer them our support and condolences at this incredibly difficult and distressing time."
Knight urged pregnant women to continue with their antenatal checkups. "Women might be nervous of meeting their doctor and midwives or go into hospital or GP practices, but antenatal checkups are absolutely essential and will prevent much more common complications than coronavirus."