Boris Johnson accused of misleading MPs over 'stay alert' slogan
Ed Davey claims PM misled parliament by denying experts had not signed off coronavirus advice
Boris Johnson has been accused of misleading parliament by suggesting that his top medical and scientific advisers signed off his government's new "stay alert" slogan.
The acting Liberal Democrat leader, Ed Davey, claims the prime minister misled MPs "inadvertently or otherwise" by telling them in a debate in the Commons on Monday that reports that they had not approved the message were "not right".
Davey has asked Johnson to come back to the chamber to "clear up this discrepancy" and ensure that Hansard, the official record of parliamentary proceedings, is clarified so that it is accurate.
Davey has written to Johnson about his response to the Guardian's report on Monday that neither Prof Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, nor Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, had approved the "stay alert" message. Political leaders, scientists and doctors have criticised it as vague and confusing and warned that it could lead to the erosion of public compliance with the lockdown rules.
The experts appeared to undermine Johnson's denial when asked about the report by the BBC's political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, when they appeared alongside him at a press conference on Monday evening.
In the debate about the government's new plan to ease the lockdown Davey said: "Throughout this crisis, many of us have put party politics aside to support the national effort to defeat coronavirus and we want to keep doing that, not least because the British people have sacrificed so much already, but in return, the government must be clear with the British people and reassure us that ministers are following the science and the advice of independent experts.
"So will the prime minister confirm new reports that neither the chief medical officer nor the chief scientific adviser signed off yesterday's shift in the public health message from 'stay at home' to 'stay alert'?"
In reply Johnson said: "That is not right".
In his letter Davey told Johnson he was "extremely concerned" that his denial appeared to be at odds with what Whitty and Vallance said to Kuenssberg.
He reminded the prime minister he had inquired about the "scientific and evidential basis for the change in messaging" when Johnson briefed opposition party leaders by telephone on Sunday, ahead of his televised address that night in which he set out the first steps towards easing the lockdown.
In his letter, Davey said: "It is also why when, having read press reports that the change in public health messaging had not been signed off by either the chief medical officer or the chief scientific officer, that during your statement to the house on Monday I asked you directly about that. In response you refuted these suggestions and stated that those reports were 'not right'.
"I was therefore extremely concerned to watch at the press conference just hours later both the chief medical officer or the chief scientific officer refuse to confirm they had directly signed off on the new message of 'stay alert' – seemingly in direct contradiction to your answer to me."
Challenging Johnson to set the record straight, he added: "I think we can both agree that if you have misled parliament, inadvertently or otherwise, that this is incredibly serious. I write to you in the hope that not only can you clear up this discrepancy, but that you attend the house to correct the record at your earliest convenience."
The Guardian approached Downing Street to seek the prime minister's response to Davey.
Asked on Monday about Whitty and Vallance's role in the change from "stay at home" to "stay alert", a government spokesperson, referring to the scientific advisory group for emergencies (Sage), said: "Sage advice fed into the new strategy as it has throughout the Covid-19 response."