The remote Cumbrian town with the UK's highest Covid-19 infection rate
Barrow-in-Furness has fewer visitors than the nearby Lake District, yet has one of the worst death rates outside London
It is one of the remotest towns in England, situated on a windy peninsula a 45-minute drive from the nearest motorway and receives a fraction of the visitors of the nearby Lake District. Yet Barrow-in-Furness in Cumbria has the highest coronavirus infection rate in the UK.
According to the latest government figures, 552 people in Barrow have so far been infected with Covid-19, a rate of 882.2 for every 100,000 people. To put that into context, the English average is 244.5 for every 100,000; Scotland's is 250.6; Wales' is 365.4 and Northern Ireland's 220.5.
Sixty-one Barrovians had died from Covid-19 by 1 May, including Simon Guest, a much-loved radiographer at Furness general hospital. It is a lot in a town of 67,000 people, giving it a death rate of 91 for every 100,000, one of the worst outside of London.
"It is a big worry, especially with the lockdown being released on Wednesday," said Lee Roberts, deputy leader of Barrow borough council, who complains he has not seen any data analysis looking into the figures.
The first person to die from Covid-19 in Barrow attended a house party in the town where at least five other people were infected, according to one expert familiar with the local infection pattern. The party took place before lockdown on 23 March and there is no suggestion the host or any guests were being reckless.
Quite how everyone else in Barrow got infected is not yet clear, according to Colin Cox, the director of public health for Cumbria. He said the high infection rate could in part be explained by the fact more people in Barrow have been tested than in other places.
"The rate of testing in Barrow has been two to three times higher than in many other parts of the north-west, so that will explain a fair chunk of it, but I don't think it will explain all of it," said Cox.
Barrow is part of the University Hospitals of Morecambe Bay NHS foundation trust (UHMBT), which covers three hospitals treating coronavirus patients: the Furness general in Barrow, the Royal Lancaster Infirmary and the Westmorland general in Kendal in South Lakeland. After Barrow, Lancaster and South Lakeland have the second and third highest rates of coronavirus infection, which corresponds with much higher than average testing rates, said Cox.
The trust started testing healthcare workers and their families at the end of February, three weeks before other testing pioneers such as Sheffield, according to David Wilkinson, the trust's director of people and organisational development.
"We started swabbing our employees and household members who were symptomatic of coronavirus at the end of February 2020. Since then, we have swabbed 9,617 individuals, made up of UHMBT employees and household members, hospital inpatients, care home residents and staff, and key workers from other organisations and their households," he said.
According to doctors in the region, the hospitals have not been overwhelmed with Covid-19 patients at any point in the crisis, with up to 100 beds free some days thanks to a combination of routine procedures being cancelled and people avoiding hospitals.
But the high rate of infection in Barrow continues to cause concern locally. "What I would hope for is some sort of deeper analysis, which we have been pushing for," said Roberts. He has his own theories, such as high levels of deprivation among the densely packed terraces: "Most of Barrow is very compact: 40 to 50% of Barrow is terraced housing and we've got a lot of flats, we've got a lot of deprivation, a lot of health inequalities."
The constituency of Barrow in Furness has higher than average levels of asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, high blood pressure and obesity, all of which are known to be risk factors for Covid-19. "We have quite a lot of historic respiratory problems from people who worked in old industry, in the ship yards," said Roberts.
Figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) this month showed that those living in the poorest parts of England and Wales were dying at twice the rate of those in the richest areas.
Barrow's population is also older than average, with 22.7% of residents aged 65 to 90, compared with the England average of 18.3%.
Roberts said he would like to see data on who was being infected.
He added: "You would hope some sort of spike would attract some sort of resource to come in and help. You'd want someone to say: 'We better look at that to see if we can learn from it.' But so far we haven't had any detailed information."
This article was amended on 13 May 2020. An earlier version misspelled the name of people from Barrow-in-Furness as "Barrowvians".