Platitudes won't stop more BAME health workers and patients dying of Covid-19
I'm a British Asian GP who's been hospitalised for coronavirus – protecting staff must be a priority, not just a tickbox exercise
As a British Asian, I found last week's statistics on ethnicity and coronavirus deeply worrying. Black, Asian and minority ethnic patients account for more than a third of those in critical care with Covid-19 and 17% of deaths from the virus.
Even accounting for age and socio-economic factors, we are still more likely to get coronavirus more seriously than white people.
That's certainly what happened in my family. My husband, also British Asian, and I both suffered quite badly with coronavirus a few weeks ago. We are usually very well with no health conditions and have been taking vitamin D supplements for years. Yet we both had debilitating symptoms of fever, severe muscle and chest pain, breathlessness and fatigue, which in my case lasted for three weeks. I was hospitalised for a few days and given antibiotics for pneumonia. Fortunately we both made a good recovery but it has left me unsure whether being BAME contributed at all to the severity of our illness.
As doctors, we were both tested, but not until the second week of illness with negative results. We had classic coronavirus symptoms and in my case a chest X-ray also showed Covid-19 lung changes. Testing is recommended within five days of illness and this would explain our negative results although we could have been among the up to 30% of patients who tested negative for the virus, even though we had it.
I am acutely conscious now about safety and my responsibility to keep my patients and staff safe, with adequate PPE. As a practice we have been fortunate to have supplies for at least the short term. Some of our colleagues – BAME and white – have been very poorly with Covid-19 symptoms and it has been a worrying time. We have put anyone we can on home working with just essential admin, reception and four doctors in the surgery each day. All appointments are by telephone or video clinics, unless they are urgent Covid or non-Covid issues that need a face-to-face consultation, in which case we wear our PPE and see them in a hot (Covid-19) or cold (non Covid-19) area.
It is all very energy-sapping and stressful, even though we are not busy in terms of the numbers of patients we meet. Last week's statistics are certainly anecdotally borne out at my surgery. I have seen BAME patients with acute symptoms of coronavirus who have needed hospital admissions both with and without underlying health conditions – a black patient in her 40s with well-controlled blood pressure was admitted with Covid-pneumonia and needed oxygen support and a 59-year-old Asian man with no health conditions spent two weeks in hospital. In general, BAME patients with coronavirus illness have been younger, compared with white patients.
NHS England is rolling out a risk assessment for staff. Recommendations could include redeploying those at risk to areas with low chance of exposure to Covid-19 or working from home. In my surgery, we are already implementing this through Covid and non-Covid rotas, effective social distancing, use of screens and limiting hotdesking. But it is hard to see how this could work in small GP practices or those with large numbers of BAME staff. At present there is no occupational health support within primary care. Once face-to-face NHS routine work starts to increase again or there is a second wave then workforce shortages would ensue if staff were mainly working from home due to shielding.
My concern is that the risk assessment process won't be robust enough. Staff should feel that they can raise their own safety concerns without a sense of guilt or anxiety for their jobs. But many BAME medics do not feel able to do this. An ex-colleague of mine in north-east England was told a risk assessment at her surgery was not needed as she was the only BAME staff member, and would be "absolutely fine" if she took some vitamin D. And despite having had coronavirus, I am unsure how immune I now am.
Everyone, regardless of ethnicity, needs to be risk-assessed and have a voice. Otherwise, there's a danger that these assessments become meaningless when staff face censure for reporting PPE shortages and a risk that BAME and more junior staff, or those with disabilities, are not heard. Preventing further deaths of BAME patients and those working in the NHS requires much more effort and care than platitudes and a tickbox tool.
Zara Aziz is a GP partner in Bristol