Welsh national parks urge people not to cross border to go hiking
Lockdown ease in England prompts concern people will drive to Wales to exercise
The three Welsh national parks have urged people not to cross the border from England to go hiking in the mountains or visit its beaches, pointing out that stringent restrictions on driving to do exercise remain in Wales.
There is growing concern that the easing of restrictions over travelling to undertake exercise in England on Wednesday may prompt lovers of the outdoors to head for the hills and coastlines of Wales.
In a joint statement, the parks made it clear people should not cross the border to visit and also called for Welsh residents to stay away unless they live in the parks or close enough to walk there.
The Welsh government, which has not changed the "stay at home" message, says people risk being stopped by police, turned back and even fined if they travel to Wales for exercise.
In its statement, the Brecon Beacons, Snowdonia and Pembrokeshire coast national parks said: "The park authorities are calling on all UK residents to respect rules and measures in place in Wales to protect everyone."
The Welsh government rules are that people can exercise more than once a day but they should stay local.
Tegryn Jones, the chief executive of the Pembrokeshire coast national park authority, said: "In Wales the lockdown continues and you should stay at home unless you are undertaking essential activities. This also means you should not drive to exercise, and only exercise from home.
"For those who do not live within walking distance the message from us is clear: do not visit Wales's national parks until the Welsh government's guidelines to avoid unnecessary travel in Wales have been lifted.
"We appreciate that the restrictions are challenging for people, but keeping our residents, visitors and staff safe is the first priority. When the time is right we look forward to welcoming you back to the national parks of Wales."
Welsh police reported a significant increase of traffic on the roads over the weekend following newspaper speculation about the easing of the lockdown.
On Monday the Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, expressed concern that Boris Johnson's messaging over exercise in England may prompt more people to cross the border to go walking, running or cycling.
Emyr Williams, the chief executive of Snowdonia national park, said: "People cannot drive to exercise in Wales – no matter where they live – and there will continue to be no parking or access to the most popular sites in the Welsh national parks.
"We urge visitors planning on coming to climb Snowdon or any other popular peaks and sites to follow government guidance, to stay at home and exercise in their local area."
Julian Atkins, the chief executive of Brecon Beacons national park, said: "Exercise in the outdoors is hugely beneficial for physical and mental wellbeing and this has been recognised by the Welsh government in their minor amendments to legislation that now allow people to exercise from their doorstep more than once a day. We hope we have clarified the differences between Wales and England."
On Monday police in the Lake District urged people to "take a long hard look at your own conscience" and stay away from the national park, despite the prime minister telling people they can drive to beauty spots for exercise in England from Wednesday.