Elizabeth Gardiner: 'Health and care workers should be free to speak out on PPE'
Whistleblowers are a safety valve – it's everyone's business to reveal dangerous working practices, says the head of the Protect charity
If recent experience is anything to go by, Boris Johnson's recent decision to allow people to return to work without clear guidelines in place to limit the chance of people contracting Covid-19 is likely to lead to many speaking out about poor workplace practice.
Already, the pandemic has sparked reports of NHS workers being warned, threatened or disciplined for speaking up about the lack of personal protective equipment (PPE) and testing for coronavirus and similar worries raised in the care sector. It underlines the need for a shift in attitudes in UK workplaces to whistleblowers, underpinned by an overhaul of the law to afford them greater protection, according to Elizabeth Gardiner, the new chief executive of the whistleblowing charity, Protect.
"What we would like to see is a proactive duty on employers to protect whistleblowers from being victimised," she says. "That would be the sort of cultural shift that we're looking for."
A good organisation will want to hear when things start going wrong, say Gardiner. "Threatening people not to raise very important issues and saying 'your job is at risk', means that people won't hear about those concerns. If they're that important, we need to hear."
In the first month of lockdown, more than 260 callers contacted the charity's confidential helpline: reports include people being threatened or bullied for trying to raise Covid-19-related concerns with managers. "Forty percent of [those] calls were Covid-related …. and 60% of all of those calls were either from the health or social care sector," says Gardiner.
"We've heard … about the lack of PPE, as well as from support staff concerned about social distancing and being required to come into work when they could work from home. Some care home staff have told us they have been forced to go into work when they should really be self-isolating, but no other staff are available to help, and we've had calls where care home staff were told they could not bring in their own PPE for use.
Gardiner is particularly concerned that despite the health secretary Matt Hancock saying all health workers should be able to speak out, "we've heard direct from some care sector workers who have been threatened with disciplinary action if they persist in raising concerns."
Last month, the charity was among the international signatories to a letter that called on public authorities and institutions across the globe to protect anyone exposing "harms, abuses and serious wrongdoing", not least when extraordinary powers have had to be rushed through to cope with the pandemic.
Does Gardiner not think it surprising that NHS workers feel the need to contact the charity at all, given the introduction of NHS England's freedom to speak up policy following Sir Robert Francis's review of whistleblowing in the wake of the Mid Staffs hospital scandal? After all, it led to trained guardians being put in place to ensure that NHS workers can speak up about any issues affecting their ability to do their job.
"We've seen a change in the culture in the NHS: the right messaging going out from the top and the introduction in every trust in England of somebody whose role it is to make sure that there's a place you can turn to," says Gardiner. "That's really important and I don't think we should underestimate how important those changes are."But we're not there yet, and there is more to be done. Whenever we hear a story that people are being victimised in the NHS it is really troubling, because it's such an important area and we've seen what harm can be done when it goes wrong."Yet despite a slew of scandals over the years, too many of those who speak up still face bullying, suspensions or forced dismissals of whistleblowers. Last year the charity handled calls from 3,188 individuals from across the private, public and voluntary sector. These reflected a range of concerns including working practices (19%), financial malpractice (14%), the abuse of a vulnerable person (15%), and patient safety (10%).
All employers need to heed whistleblowers as an early-warning system and have effective arrangements in place "not just those in large, heavily regulated sectors like health and financial services," she says. "We want organisations to be more accountable to their staff and to see better outcomes for whistleblowers who really are acting in the best interest of us all. Let's not forget the Wuhan doctor, Li Wenliang who first spoke out about the deadly coronavirus but was silenced by police and investigated for 'false rumours'."
Part of the problem are the gaps in the law. Instead of dealing piecemeal with the myriad loopholes in the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (PIDA), the charity wants to see it reformed. Currently it is not protecting enough workers and only covers a person once they have blown the whistle and only if they can then prove that they have suffered detrimental treatment as a result. This needs to change, says Gardiner. She was involved in drawing up a draft bill last autumn which the charity wants to see adopted by government to catch up with international best practice, such as recent EU legislation.The proposals in the draft bill, include adding a long list of workers – such as job applicants, self-employed people and interns – currently exempt from legal protection, with little or no recourse at an employment tribunal if they have experienced detrimental treatment for whistleblowing.
But Gardiner fears that these measures alone will not do the trick. The charity wants the government to create a whistleblowing commissioner post with the powers to determine and impose significant penalties – financial or otherwise – to concentrate minds of organisations or regulators that mishandle whistleblowing and fail to adhere to policy. "I'd love to say, all we need to do is to insist that employers put effective whistleblowing arrangements in place," she says. "But we've seen that even [in] a very highly regulated sector like finance, things still go wrong and so I think there is a need for a carrot and a stick approach."Gardiner would like "different sanctions for different sectors, depending on what is appropriate". Meanwhile she hopes attitudes and employment practices will change. "We hope out of this terrible pandemic, there will be greater value placed on the care workforce and the care home sector will look to re-evaluate the role whistleblowing can play in keeping staff and residents safe."
Ultimately, she wants society to realise that it's everyone's business to speak up. "Why wouldn't you want to hear if somebody's telling you there's something going wrong? Whistleblowers are a safety valve and one of the best forms of risk management that there is."
Age: 54.
Family: Partner, four children.
Lives: Greenwich, London.
Education: Midhurst Grammar School (Comprehensive), West Sussex; St John's College, Oxford University (Philosophy, Politics and Economics); BPP Law School (graduate diploma, law and legal practice); currently studying mathematics at Open University.
Career: March 2020-present: chief executive, Protect; 2019-March 2020: acting chief executive, Protect; January-June 2019: interim director, policy and legal, Protect; 2018-2019: legal officer, Protect; 2016-2018: employment solicitor, Working Families; 2016: temporary solicitor, YESS Law; 2013-2016: trainee solicitor, Powell &amp; Co with secondment to Simmons &amp; Simmons; 2006-13: head of policy and parliamentary, Working Families; 2002-05: caseworker for Rt Hon Nick Raynsford MP; 1998-99: health policy analyst, IHSM; 1992-98: parliamentary officer, Royal College of Nursing; 1988-92: senior researcher, House of Lords Opposition Whips Office; 1987-8: secretary to leader of the opposition, House of Lords.
Public life: 2019-present: Volunteer, Rights of Women Sexual Harassment Advice Line.
Interests: Family, running, travel.