Bereaved families seek 'justice' for UK victims of coronavirus
Facebook group formed to 'hold British government to account' over Covid-19 failings
Bereaved British families whose relatives died because of Covid-19 have formed a group to campaign for justice, demanding that the government accepts its failures may have contributed to their deaths.
Matt Fowler, whose 56-year-old father Ian, a retired design engineer for Jaguar Land Rover, died on 13 April, said he and other families believed their relatives were unnecessarily exposed to the coronavirus because the UK government allowed it to spread and failed to impose a lockdown before 23 March.
Formed by an initial 30 families, the group is inviting other bereaved people to join, and intends to seek advice about appropriate legal or other formal proceedings to pursue accountability.
Jo Goodman, whose father Stuart, 72, a photographer, died on 2 April, said that although families must be represented in any future public inquiry, they did not want to wait for that as it could take years to conclude.
"The time to seek answers and justice is now, as this virus is still spreading, and the government is adding further trauma to our loss, with the measures it is now taking," she said. "I was furious when I watched Boris Johnson on television announce the relaxation of the lockdown, and the confusion around it, and now we feel so many more families are going to suffer as we are, because the virus will spread again.
"The way the government has presented its handling of the virus as a success, and Johnson talking about the country coming through stronger, is tone deaf to families like mine who are feeling like we will never get over or come to terms with our loss."
Goodman said she and other families are particularly aggrieved that after Covid-19 began to spread from China and caused severe outbreaks in Spain and Italy, the government's initial plan allowed the virus to move through the population, and measures were not even taken immediately to shield elderly and vulnerable people. Sir Patrick Vallance, the government's chief scientific adviser, justified the policy on 13 March by saying that if 60% of the population contracted the virus, most would only contract a mild illness and "herd immunity" would be achieved, which Vallance said was among "the key things we need to do."
Fowler, in the introductory message about the formation of the bereaved families group, wrote of his father: "He was the life and soul of my family and his loss has broken us all. I can not ignore the fact that his exposure to the virus would have been reduced significantly if our government had heeded the warnings of health professionals and enacted lockdown even a week earlier. This group has been set up for those affected to support each other and to unite to work for justice in the future.
"We believe the time will come where we will be able to bring the government to justice. This group is a way to connect the families affected by these government failings so that, together, we can hold them to account for the losses of our loved ones."
Goodman, who believes her father contracted the virus when he attended a hospital appointment on 18 March, said that anger over the government's handling of the pandemic, and the continuing spread of the virus and its dominance of the news, have made it difficult for families to grieve.
"I feel that my dad, who was vulnerable due to health issues, was a victim of the herd immunity plan. He was never going to have a chance if he caught the virus, so was never going to contribute to herd immunity.
"We are calling on the government, instead of the self-congratulatory tone, to admit it made mistakes and acknowledge that our loved ones might well still be here if different actions had been taken. And to accept that their insistence on presenting their approach as a success has caused additional emotional harm to grieving families."
The government has insisted throughout that it has taken the right decisions at the right time based on scientific advice, and denies that achieving herd immunity was ever part of its plan or a goal.