Dominic Raab adds to confusion over changes to UK lockdown rules
Foreign secretary says measures on people returning to work will be introduced on Wednesday
The confusion over Boris Johnson's request for people to return to work if they can has continued, as the foreign secretary said changes would be introduced on Wednesday, not Monday as initially stated.
The prime minister made a televised address to the nation on Sunday evening setting out his roadmap out of the coronavirus lockdown. He said that those who could not work from home were being "actively encouraged" to return to work, prompting a backlash from unions who said there was insufficient guidance in place to keep people safe.
"How can the prime minister – with 12 hours' notice – tell people they should be going back to sites and factories? It's a recipe for chaos," said the TUC's general secretary, Frances O'Grady.
﻿However, speaking on Monday morning, Dominic Raab said that people were being encouraged to return to work on Wednesday and more guidance was due to be set out.
"Starting this Wednesday the new step measures will begin," Raab told BBC Radio 4's Today programme, adding there could be more announcements on 1 June and 4 July.
"If you can work from home you should continue to do so but there are vital sectors of the economy like manufacturers and construction, where people can't do their job from home, so we are saying to them they should now, from Wednesday, go back to work.
"The guidance – the full detail will be set out in a document today and then further guidance on Tuesday. So all of the guidance and preparation could be done."
A press release issued ahead of the prime minister's statement on Sunday, said: "[The prime minister] will say that from tomorrow (Monday) 'anyone who can't work from home, for instance those in construction and manufacturing, should be actively encouraged to go to work'." Johnson's only direct mention of changes being brought in on Wednesday in his speech was in relation to allowing unlimited exercise.
Johnson justified the timing of his address – on a Sunday evening when parliament was not sitting – by saying that some changes would be introduced immediately on Monday. Speaking to MPs at prime minister's questions last week, he said: "We will want, if we possibly can, to get going with some of these measures on Monday, and I think it will be a good thing if people have an idea of what is coming the following day."
The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said the new lockdown instructions were starting to "unravel" and that the public needed clarity.
Speaking to LBC radio, he said: "I accept that for some things, like when can a school open, that's going to be conditional, but on this business of going back to work, the suggestion was last night that people go back to work today if they can't work at home."
"I was actually quite surprised the prime minister said, effectively in 12 hours' time, start going back to work without those [guidelines on making workplaces safe] in place," he added.
"We needed that clarity and it is unravelling a bit this morning because I think the foreign secretary has now said, 'Well, go back to work doesn't really mean until Wednesday', so suddenly it has shifted."
The shadow business secretary, Ed Miliband, tweeted that the government's plan was "shambolic".
Raab said it was up to employers to make sure their workplaces were safe for employees and workers should use their common sense if they did not feel their workplace was secure. On whether workers could walk out, he said he would not answer "hypothetical" scenarios.
The government is now using a "stay alert" slogan, which has replaced "stay at home".
It was put to Raab that lower earners will be going back to work first and therefore risk catching and spreading the disease, while white-collar professionals can stay at home, which could create a two-tier system.
Raab said workers would only return to "Covid-secure settings", that further sector-specific guidance would be released, and that businesses had been given a "lead time" to implement changes.
The Today presenter Mishal Husain said: "People might already be on their way to work now, not knowing what kind of workplace they will find." To which Raab replied: "No, the changes will take effect from Wednesday."
In another apparent departure from Sunday's government message, Raab said it was possible for someone to meet both of their parents in a park as long as they kept two metres apart, apparently signalling it was OK to see people from other households outdoors.
Earlier he told BBC Breakfast that as long as people used their common sense and stayed two metres apart they could "meet up with other people".
Anyone arriving in the UK would be subject to a 14-day isolation period, except people coming from France, Ireland and those transporting vital freight, he said.