My working week: 'A 999 caller is hiding from someone with a shotgun'
We get lots of reports of physical distancing breaches, and there are more calls about mental health and domestic violence
A hospital calls. There is an intoxicated, disruptive and Covid 19-positive male refusing to leave. This is not the first time he has turned up at the hospital. Police manage to get him off the premises and follow him at a safe distance to ensure he keeps walking.
People trapped at home are made miserable by neighbours using lockdown as a chance to blast music at all hours. Pleas for consideration are often met with alcohol-fuelled abuse.
Domestic abuse calls have increased substantially. A caller's partner has lost his job and punched her in the face, prompting the dog to bite him. Another has an ex banging on doors and windows at night demanding to be let in. An angry male smashes a spade against his ex's front door trying to force entry.
One caller has been threatened with a shotgun by a family member and has barricaded herself in a room. A teenager asks police to take her away from her abusive parents, finding lockdown with them intolerable. A young girl calls in tears – she's not a victim of abuse but she's finding lockdown with her family a bit overwhelming, and says she wants people to relax.
We're still getting the usual calls which aren't relevant to police, and many appear to be oblivious to the crisis. An elderly man has had a TV delivered and hasn't a clue how to set it up. I tell him this isn't an appropriate use of the emergency line. He tells me it's an emergency for him. I give him a couple of numbers to call.
Mental health has always been an element of many calls to the police and the crisis has brought about a notable increase – either from people suffering with their own mental health, or concerned friends, relatives and partners. Perhaps they're not getting their usual level of support, or the absence of normality has exacerbated their problems. A man walking the streets calls to say he's being chased by aliens. I hear him knock on a stranger's front door, asking to come in.
Some calls make me smile. "I'm praying to Allah the prime minister will be OK," one person says. "I usually phone you when I'm drunk but today I am not. You will be OK too!"
We're meant to ask in any call where officers will be attending if anyone at the property has Covid-19 symptoms. But when someone is screaming and shouting and you're struggling to get basic information it's not always possible. We advise the public on physical distancing guidelines yet our call-handlers can only comply with them when space permits.
We're getting a lot of calls about people breaching physical distancing. The majority of people are abiding by the rules but there are still large gatherings taking place, particularly in warmer weather. Some curtain-twitching detectives are providing exact times of the comings and goings of neighbours, even photos and car registration numbers.
There will be innocent reasons for many people, such as delivery of shopping and medication, and there simply aren't the resources to investigate smaller incidents. You wonder what the true motivation for some of the calls is. But some tip-offs are valid and helpful.
A cupping business has a steady stream of customers visiting. I don't know what cupping is, so the caller explains as I look at some quite gruesome photos on Google. Suction cups are placed on the skin of the back, sometimes cuts are made and blood is drawn.
A dog grooming business is open. When officers go to the address the proprietor is about to start on a canine customer. She says she is providing an essential service for the wellbeing of animals. "To be fair the dog was in a bit of a state," writes an officer on the log.
Some details have been changed
If you would like to contribute to our My working week series about your job in public services, get in touch by emailing sarah.johnson@theguardian.com