'Alert for what?': Manchester confused by new government slogan
Dog walkers and people out for exercise at city's Alexandra Park bewildered by new coronavirus messaging
As ministers launched the new "stay alert" slogan to usher in the next phase of the coronavirus lockdown – including unlimited exercise and sunbathing - members of the public voiced confusion and anxiety over the lack of clarity it offered.
"Alert for what? You can't see the virus," said Rose Smith, 88, one of those out in Manchester's Alexandra Park on Sunday. "I don't think it makes much difference if people start being allowed to exercise more. It's when they start opening things like pubs and clubs that it'll spread."
Aside from going to walk her dog, Jack, Smith has not left her house in Moss Side since the lockdown began seven weeks ago. Her daughter who lives nearby brings food and other essentials. Even if the guidance is updated, she believes it is unlikely to affect her. "I'm supposedly vulnerable, but we're all vulnerable – a virus is a virus," she said.
Others were concerned that a change in the tone of the government's communication during the pandemic could lead to more people gathering and the virus spreading further.
Elizabeth Webster, 42, who lives close to the park with her Rhodesian ridgeback, Ming the Merciless, said she felt "very anxious" that the message was no longer to stay at home.
"I think we went into lockdown too late, and the government's handling of the whole crisis has been shambolic. It remains a very frightening time and I don't think people should be encouraged to go out more," she said.
Although the lockdown means Webster has struggled to find work in the TV and film industry, she believes ministers should "stand firm" on the previous guidance. "I think they're only doing it because people want a timeline of how to get out of it," she said.
William Cartmell, 36, who was out for a walk, similarly felt that the government was responding to a general fatigue among the public. "I think people are getting tired of the existing advice. It's probably losing its significance," he said.
When asked what "stay alert" meant to him, Cartmell said the phrase was "vague" and "open to interpretation", but he didn't think "they'll be saying people can go out as usual".
Of more concern to him was the fact that businesses could cynically interpret the message to order employees back to work. "My work are trying to get us back there, but they've got to work out how to build people's confidence about how they'll stay safe," he added.
Mohamed Elkhouly, 22, a football coach who lives in Manchester's city centre, also felt it was the "wrong time" in terms of the spread of the virus to begin easing measures, but he sympathised with the government in terms of their need to kickstart the economy. "I think 'stay alert' means just to keep the same alertness – don't socialise too much," he said.