Religious leaders to go on 'virtual pilgrimages' to pray for NHS staff
Senior priests and rabbis will walk to hospitals and other key worker sites to offer prayers
A rabbi will run from his home to several London hospitals on Monday night, stopping at each one to offer prayers of thanks for NHS staff and other essential workers, as part of a series of "virtual pilgrimages" by senior faith leaders.
Among those taking part will be Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, Cardinal Vincent Nichols, the Catholic archbishop of Westminster, and Ephraim Mirvis, the chief rabbi.
Priests and rabbis will be paired for simultaneous walks or runs to key worker sites, such as schools, hospitals, care homes, bus stops and food banks, over the next few weeks. The pilgrimages have been organised by the Council of Christians and Jews.
Jonathan Wittenberg, the senior rabbi of Masorti Judaism, came up with the idea because he wanted "the voices of religions to be heard more in support of the amazing and inspiring efforts so many in our society are making, from the NHS to care workers, people stocking shop shelves, running food banks, volunteering to make visors and gowns, getting shopping and prescriptions for elderly or immunity impaired neighbours, and keeping up our morale in countless creative ways."
His route from his home in north London will take in the Royal Free, University College London hospital, Great Ormond Street hospital and the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery. At each place, he will stop to "salute the courage, devotion and dedication" of NHS staff and offer prayers.
Wittenburg, a diabetic who will run at night to minimise the risk to his health, said: "I feel very aware of not being in the front line. So the least I can do is appreciate and support those who are.
"But this is not just about the present. It's also about looking to the future and working so that the 'new normal' is a way of life in which we notice and care for each other and nature with greater attentiveness and kindness. These are our most basic and most universal religious and human values."
His partner for the first virtual pilgrimage is the Rev Colin Sinclair, the moderator of the Church of Scotland, who will visit two hospitals and some care homes near his home in Edinburgh during his walk.
He said: "One of the paradoxical aspects of lockdown and physical distancing is that other barriers seem to have broken down. We have a solidarity in our shared humanity, across both our beliefs and our place in society. In the light of coronavirus we are all ordinary people struggling with the same problem and as such we all know anxiety, uncertainty and also tears.
"No one would wish Covid-19 on anyone, yet it has helped us reassess what really matters in our world and how we can live, work and respect one another. I am glad as a Christian leader to honour those serving in the frontline and also to offer prayers for them and those they care for."