Coronavirus cycling boom makes a good bike hard to find
Would-be cyclists keen to exercise during the lockdown have cleared stores of their stock
Isabel had not ridden a bike since university 10 years ago when lockdown motivated her to seek out two wheels. But half a dozen cycle shops in south London gave her the same answer: no chance. We're out of stock.
One or two said they could sell her a high-spec racing bike for a price in the region of £1,000. The others advised her to place an order, wait a couple of weeks for the bicycle to be delivered from the manufacturer, then another week or so for it to be built by the store. And there was no option to try before buying.
Since the lockdown began, bicycle manufacturers and shops across the UK have reported a boom in demand, and many expect a further increase in sales as people consider resuming journeys to work when restrictions ease.
Brompton, the UK's largest bike manufacturer, producing almost 50,000 folding cycles a year, has seen a fivefold increase in online sales since the start of April, and Halfords has reported a "strong performance" and a 23% increase in share price.
Up to 20,000 bicycles which have already been sold are awaiting delivery and building, according to the Association of Cycle Traders. "Sudden demand from essential workers and the significant adoption of cycling for exercise, travel and family leisure during the pandemic, further fuelled by good weather, is putting an extreme demand upon the industry," it said.
Cycle repair shops have also seen a surge in business as people have brought unused bikes stored in garages and sheds back on the roads.
Bike retailers are permitted to remain open during the lockdown, but are operating "one in, one out" policies and banning customers from trying out cycles before they buy.
Isabel listed three reasons why she wanted a bike. "It's a way of getting out of the house, and is good for my mental and physical health. Whenever the lockdown eases, it's a way of avoiding public transport. And I've always thought about cycling in London but the traffic made me nervous. Now seems a good time to try it."
In the end, she found a secondhand bike for sale online, and has joined the growing number of new and returning cyclists on the UK's roads.
In Scotland, huge year-on-year increases have been recorded by dozens of cycle counters placed on roads by pressure group Cycling Scotland. Edinburgh saw weekday increases of up to 252% and weekend increases of up to 454% in the first three weeks of April. Only one area of the city, close to the university, saw a fall. In Glasgow, cycle traffic rose by 74%.
"The roads are quieter, the air is cleaner and there are clear physical and mental health benefits to cycling," said Keith Irving, chief executive of Cycling Scotland. "There has always been a latent demand for cycling in the UK, and now that there's an opportunity for a safer and more pleasant experience, people are grabbing it with both hands."
In Manchester, there has been a 22% increase in cycling since the lockdown began. "Demand for bikes is phenomenal at the moment … and the industry is having a hard time keeping up – which I think is a great problem to have," said Chris Boardman, the Olympic gold medallist who is now Greater Manchester's commissioner for cycling and walking.
London has also seen a big rise in bike use, with predictions that the number of cyclists on the roads could increase tenfold when lockdown restrictions are eased. Commuting to work by public transport is expected to be challenging, as limits on the numbers of people on buses and tubes are enforced and people's fears about the risks of infection remain.
According to Will Norman, the capital's walking and cycling commissioner, restrictions on public transport mean that up to 8 million journeys every day will have to be made by alternative means. "If just a fraction switch to cars, London will grind to a halt, choking our economic recovery," he said.
Heidi Alexander, London deputy mayor for transport, tweeted last week about "the experience of a 45-year-old, overweight woman" taking to the roads on her bike. "Life is going to be pretty different for a while. We are going to need to change how we move around the city. I'd love this horrible period to lead to hundreds of thousands of women (and men!) in London taking to their bikes – being healthier and happier as a consequence."
But not everyone is happy about the cycling boom. A sign in rural Cambridgeshire last month urged cyclists to "stay away" and "stop panting viruses through our village", and Little Bollington parish council in Cheshire removed a notice directed at cyclists telling them to "stay in your local area" after objections.
Boards with six-inch nails were planted in woods in east Cleveland in what appears to have been an attempt to discourage cyclists, and there were reports of a "large amount of nails/tacks" being placed in London's Regent's Park in "an attack on cyclists".
Nevertheless, Paul Tomlinson, cycling director at Halfords, said: "With public transport heavily reduced and social distancing measures likely to stay in place for some time, we think many more people will turn to cycling as an alternative way of commuting."
According to the company's research, 55% of people want more government investment in cycling, 40% want dedicated cycle lanes on every road, and 20% want more places to park and lock bikes.