Ministers are using coronavirus as an excuse to erode child protection
Safeguards for children in care in England are being yanked away in the middle of a pandemic
Last month, the government removed or diluted more than 60 legal protections for children in care without any public consultation or parliamentary debate.
They include social worker visits, six-monthly reviews, independent scrutiny of fostering and adoption, the skills and experiences of children's home staff, placements of children many miles from home, the notification of criminal convictions, and more. A single statutory instrument was used to make around 100 amendments to 10 separate sets of regulations.
My charity, Article 39, has threatened legal action in response, and the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has tabled a motion to annul the regulations that forced through the changes.
The Department for Education (DfE) claims it "consulted informally with the sector who have asked for these changes to be in force as a matter of urgency" because of Covid-19. But organisations named by government as having been consulted have publicly denied this. The children's minister has refused to answer parliamentary questions seeking to establish who and what is behind this outrageous attack on children's rights.
We have been here before. Three times, in fact. In May 2016, without any public consultation, a bill was introduced that sought to allow councils to opt out of their children's social care duties for up to six years, as a trial for their permanent removal. Ministers claimed this enabled "innovation" but peers deleted the clauses. Lord Ramsbotham said they amounted "to nothing less than the subversion of parliament's constitutional position".
Two further failed attempts followed, the latest 2018 when the DfE issued what it called a "myth-busting" guide which misinformed local authorities of their statutory duties. It was withdrawn after my charity started legal proceedings. In the House of Lords last week, Lord Howarth referred to this latest onslaught as "a constitutional abuse".This time, the government is spuriously hiding behind Covid-19. For instance, while clarifying that a telephone or video call can count as a visit – vital to protect the health of children, carers and social workers – councils unable to meet statutory timescales are now allowed to visit children "as soon as is reasonably practicable". This has no precise legal meaning.
More than 6,000 children in care currently live in unregulated accommodation. BBC Newsnight last year exposed the serious harms of this type of setting. Children said they felt abandoned, terrified and suicidal. Now children in care are not entitled to receive, as a minimum, a telephone call from a social worker once every six weeks.
Six-monthly reviews of fostered children were introduced in 1945 after the manslaughter and neglect of 12-year-old Dennis O'Neill at the hands of his foster carers; these were later extended to all children in care.
But now seven decades of social work practice have been brought to an end. Instead of a review being legally required every six months, this is now "where reasonably practicable". In the first parliamentary debate on the exemption clauses, in June 2016, the then schools minister, Lord Nash, said: "Exemption [of adoption and fostering panels] could allow local authorities to trial removing a potentially invasive and unnecessary requiremen."
These panels bring a vital independent element to the approval and review of foster carers and adoptive parents. Many panels have already successfully adapted to virtual meetings since lockdown. Now they are optional.
Until midnight last Thursday, those running fostering services who are convicted of a criminal offence were required to notify Ofsted in writing without delay. This is now "as soon as is reasonably practicable". Eight-year-old Victoria Climbié was tortured and then murdered by her great-aunt and her great-aunt's partner. The subsequent public inquiry recommended a review of the law relating to private fostering (arrangements made by family members rather than local authorities). This led to new statutory duties, which have also been weakened.More than 78,000 children are in care in England. Three-quarters are the subject of a care order, where a family court has granted the local authority parental responsibility until the child reaches 18 (unless the order is rescinded earlier). These children face enough challenges without safeguards being yanked away in the middle of a pandemic.
The government says the changes are temporary to 25 September "unless extended", which is not reassuring. No such deregulation has taken place in the care systems of Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland.
But we mustn't lose heart. As successive ministers have found since 2016, children in care have many thousands of allies ready to robustly defend their rights, and I for one will not rest until this act of vandalism is rectified.
Carolyne Willow is the founder director of Article 39 and a social worker
This article was amended on 8 May 2020. An earlier version said the Department for Education issued a "myth-busting" guide last year. The document was issued in 2018 and withdrawn last year.