A champagne toast and a VE Day party to remember
Guardian photographer Murdo MacLeod was given access to the David Walker Gardens care home as it prepared to celebrate the 75th anniversary of VE Day. Clear of Covid-19, strict protective measures are in place
by  Libby Brooks. Photographs by  Murdo MacLeod
Staff put up VE Day decorations made from residents' memorabilia.
The 44 residents and 90 staff of David Walker Gardens, a purpose-built facility for older people managed by South Lanarkshire Council, have faced significant restrictions since lockdown began but it hasn't stopped them getting ready for today's celebrations.
Nearly ready – staff and residents prepare to celebrate.
"We celebrate life to the full each and every day, and regardless of the current challenges worldwide, we will continue to reminisce about days gone by and, more importantly, look to the future," says Debra Allison, the unit manager.
Alex Girdwood, 88, dances with a staff member.
Cissie Phillips, 90, enjoys a glass of champagne – she was 15 when peace was declared. Isabel O'Neill, 75, is the same age as the peace.
Mary Glass, 89, has champagne on her balcony.
Staff and residents join in a song and dance each day at 2.30pm. They enjoy grooving to classics by Vera Lynn, Village People and Captain Tom Moore and Michael Ball's recent chart-topper, You'll Never Walk Alone.
Staff collected wartime memorabilia from residents, laminating old photographs and hanging them across the garden, along with cut-outs of fighter planes and soldiers. Bunting flutters in the sunshine and an arch of red, white and blue balloons soars over the fish pond.
Laminated photographs of residents' loved ones who served in the second world war have been hung up in the garden.
Cissie Phillips joins in the daily song and dance.
As part of a new daily routine created to help residents through lockdown, the care home holds a morale-boosting song and dance event each day at 2.30pm. Rock Around the Pond brings those who are able out into the garden – which has been marked up to allow for socially distanced dancing – while others watch and sing along from their balconies.
Sharon Taylor and Sharon Nicholls are cleaner/caretakers.
The home has fortunately avoided any coronavirus infection so far and strict preventative measures are in place. Deep cleaning – disinfectant electrostatic spraying – has been implemented as an extra precaution.
Sharon Taylor and Sharon Nicholls out of their protective gear.
A resident's room is cleaned and disinfected as part of the strict protective protocol.
Liz Connolly, housekeeper, and Megan Watt, senior social care worker, don PPE.
Staff wear PPE, social distancing is in force and the main dining room is out of use. Residents avoid congregating, eating in smaller sitting rooms or their own rooms.
Joyce Beaton 89, with carer Katie Mulgrew.
Jeanette Graham, dining in one of the smaller sitting rooms.
Helen Morrison, 79, gets a socially distanced visit from her daughter, Pauline, across the garden fence.
Lockdown also means the only visitors allowed are coming to see loved ones who are dying. This is especially hard for a care home that prides itself in being as open as possible to the world beyond its walls. As Allison puts it, "Just because you're living in a care environment doesn't mean you have left the community." The ground floor is known as the Street because that's where people tend to mingle.
Helen Morrison, 79, enjoys a manicure in her room, thanks to social care worker Wendy Banza.
Again, staff have thought creatively: for Mother's Day, they held an impromptu concert with speakers playing music outdoors, which allowed visitors to speak to relatives over the garden fence.
Nancy Mackay, 92, watches from indoors as the party is set up for the big day.
Alex Girdwood, 88, is reading in his room but looks up for the photographer.
Allison remains optimistic about staff and residents' capacity to cope with the inevitable challenges brought about by the pandemic. "In a care home, you are continually facing life's challenges, as well as those in death. This is what we do."
These photographs were taken without entering the home, either through closed windows, or through open French windows while at a safe distance in the garden. Prior consent was given by service users, care home management and South Lanarkshire Council.