UK lockdown could be 'unpoliceable' this weekend, police warn
Chief constables say a loosening of restrictions will make enforcement harder
Police chiefs have warned the lockdown is slowly ebbing away with some warning that any further loosening will make key aspects "unpoliceable".
Several told the Guardian that more people were going out by foot and road, and there were clear signs of people getting tired of lockdown. At least one force said it was scaling back part of its enforcement for fear of losing public support.
The warnings come ahead of a long bank holiday weekend to mark VE Day, with the forecast warm weather expected to tempt people to go out after six weeks of restrictions.
West Yorkshire police assistant chief constable, Tim Kingsman, said: "At present, there has been no relaxation of the rules, so people shouldn't be thinking about large gatherings such as street parties."
Merseyside police said they would be stopping cars at random and that last weekend they had broken up parties with some people travelling from outside Merseyside to attend.
One chief constable in the south of England said his force expected to be busier than on New Year's Eve, with almost half the calls from the public "snitching" on people allegedly breaching the lockdown.
He said: "The public are getting tired. There's about a 10% increase in foot and road traffic compared to the start of the lockdown.
"People were reluctant to go out, they are less reluctant now. Most are complying but there is a slow, marginal growth of people not observing it."
Another chief constable said people were returning to the roads, as they realise what the law allows and they become less fearful of venturing out and catching coronavirus.
That was making policing essential journeys impossible, they said: "Now it is unpoliceable. You would have to stop so many legitimate people to find a few lawbreakers.
"People were over-complying with the lockdown. Now they are happier to have workmen coming to their homes, so more of them are on the roads, and there are more suppliers on the roads.
"Building for new homes has restarted and workers are being expected to return. We are having to go with the flow.
"I won't be worrying about people [driving] unless it is obvious they are breaking the rules. You can't say we police by consent when the majority of the public no longer support you. You have to go with the flow."
The chief constable added that policing people leaving their homes may effectively end, if rules loosen: "Unless the PM puts in new guidance about social distancing, which he won't, it's gone as a policing issue, apart from mass gathering which is easier to police."
At least three police chiefs said the idea of enforcing a "social bubble", with people restricted to how many others they can meet from outside their own household, was unworkable for officers to enforce.
Police have said that warm weather tempts people to push the limits, especially the young, who make up two-thirds of those fined. The worst days nationally so far for breaches were over the long Easter bank holiday weekend, when more than 500 fines were handed out on both Easter Saturday and Easter Sunday.
Some police leaders said the speculation about the PM's expected statement on Sunday was causing confusion. One chief constable said: "People are beginning to have their expectations raised for a relaxation on Monday. Let's see."
Police are being consulted about the government's possible ideas more than when the emergency lockdown laws were rushed through in late March as coronavirus threatened to rampage through the country and overwhelm the NHS.
One source said government officials were concerned police would leak the plans – seen as ironic, given the briefings coming from government.
