'Complete anarchy': frontline NHS staff on the coronavirus peak
Medics reflect on the stress and strain they have been under, and what might happen next
We would like to hear from key workers in the UK. You can get in touch by filling in the form \nbelow, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor\n adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your \ncontributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss \nfurther.
Medics reflect on the stress and strain they have been under, and what might happen next
More people have died of coronavirus in the UK than in any other country in Europe, and details about the true scale of the pandemic continue to emerge as the extreme pressure on the NHS begins to ease.
We have been speaking to frontline workers since the crisis began about how they are coping. They have told us how they were resigned to contracting Covid-19 because of shortages of protective equipment and a lack of testing as hospitals were inundated with coronavirus patients. Here, they recall the pandemic reaching its peak and begin to make plans for where the health service will go from here.
I'm only starting to grasp what happened now. It was so intense up until about a fortnight ago, complete anarchy. Operations were cancelled and patients came flowing in, filling up theatres, all intubated with a tube down their windpipe connected to a ventilator and trying to cling on to their lives. It was heartbreaking. I saw so many people – generally older than younger, overweight rather than underweight, and in poor health as opposed to being in great health – die a lonely death without being allowed to have any visitors.
We did as much as we could, but now the situation is getting much better and there is a feeling it is under control. Lots of results for patients' coronavirus tests came through earlier and they were negative. You need several tests to be certain, but it seems like the virus has passed here. Instead of pumping on people's chests I'm helping physiotherapists get people back on their feet. One patient has been in intensive care for 43 days and, amazingly, just stood up for the first time.
We have fewer Covid patients than before, but we're still admitting new people and some coronavirus patients have been with us for a long time. It's still very difficult, when you have extremely sick patients and they sadly can't survive, but that uncertainty isn't there as much anymore. We understand more what we need to do to help them and ourselves, but we remain concerned that doctors and nurses are not getting enough PPE and colleagues have died in the east Midlands.
We have had to weigh up not bringing people into hospital for cancer treatments against making sure we have enough beds for Covid patients. I don't envy the people having to make those decisions. What we really need to see is a sensible approach to coming out of the lockdown, because we're afraid of a second wave. It could be more fatal than the first if we bring everyone out too quickly and it would risk a second wave among the more vulnerable. That could overwhelm us and cause severe devastation.
We're still seeing Covid-19 patients and dozens have died during the past six weeks, but it's manageable now and we're now planning to open up the hospital. We're definitely seeing that some people are too scared to come to us, while others do not want to put any pressure on the NHS and are staying away until they have advanced symptoms. Staff here are frustrated, many still don't know whether they've tested positive or not. We're definitely getting some false negatives. People we know have it are only testing positive by the second or third test. Still, there's definitely evidence that if we had been able to test our colleagues, it would have helped stop the spread of it in hospitals.
We have a sense of deep loss for our colleagues who have tragically died. It could have been any one of us. It's unforgivable that we saw what happened in China, Italy and Spain, and knew it was coming. We knew that they had lost healthcare workers, but did not adequately prepare. We're going to be in this for the long haul until we get a vaccine. Covid-19 isn't going away. Its prevalence is lower in the community but it will remain with us.
We're in isolation again. One of my kids has a temperature. If she did get it, the only person she could have got it from was me. But I can't get tested because I don't have symptoms, even though one in four of those with coronavirus may be an asymptomatic carrier. My boss just said it would be better for me to isolate for two weeks anyway, even if I got tested, as we just don't have confidence in them. My daughter is a lot better, but I will continue to worry every time I go into work and could later be giving it to my family. A GP in a nearby village came out of retirement to work and died of Covid.
In terms of PPE, we were given less than a day's worth. We were given aprons, but borrowed our own goggles from dentists and brought other stuff ourselves. Things had settled down until this weekend when it was a lot busier in the town. I don't know for sure if having it gives you immunity, but I'll still be doing telephone triage from home for another few days before going back to the surgery. The next thing will be the second homers starting to make trips up to London and back again.
People are not coming in with Covid symptoms any more, it's mainly seasonal allergies. You can tell people are already anticipating being told they can come out [of lockdown], but they now know how to physically distance and abide by the one-way system. At first it was alien to them and people were still coming in saying family members have coronavirus and asking if we have anything for a dry cough and fever. It was alarming.
-key-workers
At its peak we were at breaking point, along with many other pharmacies. I worked for 15 consecutive days because colleagues were off with symptoms. The pressure was not unique to us, I would wait for an hour to get through to the wholesaler on the phone and we were making orders three times the usual size. Now there's not even a chance to listen to the automated message before they pick up. I'm ordering more allergy tablets, sprays and eye drops than paracetamol and inhalers.
The trust is working out how to implement the recovery phase where they split the hospital into different coloured zones: those with Covid, suspected coronavirus and so-called clean areas. It's a difficult transition and we will struggle to catch up with the cancelled elective treatments. Meanwhile, the NHS is now asking hospitals to lead on purchasing equipment they are struggling to get, the central process failed and many have not been able to keep up with the unprecedented demand.
In NHS administration departments across the country, there's going to have to be investment because it feels like physical distancing will continue for a while. We sent people home with old desktop computers but we need to give them laptops, and we might need to convert our old-fashioned individual offices into more generic hotdesks to support more flexible working. We're going to have to change the way we think. We are trying to work out what our plan is for the new normal.