Government confirms 400,000 Turkish gowns are useless for NHS
Minister Brandon Lewis says much-heralded shipment fell below medical standard
We would like to hear from key workers in the UK. You can get in touch by filling in the form \nbelow, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor\n adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your \ncontributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss \nfurther.
Minister Brandon Lewis says much-heralded shipment fell below medical standard
A cabinet minister has confirmed that 400,000 gowns from Turkey to protect medics from coronavirus have been impounded because they were poor quality, but he insisted "strong supplies" were now coming through to the frontline.
The personal protective equipment (PPE) from Turkey was heralded by ministers several weeks ago as "a very significant" shipment that would ease a shortage of gowns in the NHS, but the delivery turned into a shambles after it was repeatedly delayed.
In a final blow to the government, Brandon Lewis, the Northern Ireland secretary, acknowledged on Thursday that the gowns had in fact been useless for medical purposes.
Downing Street said the NHS was now in negotiations to get new gowns sent, or it would ask for a refund from the supplier. It would not give any details on the cost of sending an RAF plane to fetch the items.
Lewis said: "There was a view that it was good enough PPE. It is only when it has got here that teams have looked at it again and taken a view that it is not up to the right standard and they've decided not to use it.
"I think it is right that if we have got particular standards for what we want our frontline staff to be able to have access to, we make sure we stick to that.
"If something isn't right, if we're not even sure about it then I think it is better to be safe and not use that product and stick with products we are confident are the right products and the right standards."
Speaking on Sky News, he attempted to downplay the significance of the Turkish shipment, saying it was just one delivery.
"We've got some really strong supplies now coming through but we're always looking to ensure they are good enough," he said.
However, he was unable to say whether the Department of Health and Social Care would be able to get its money back, and why samples of the equipment were not checked before the transaction happened.
The items are being held in a facility near Heathrow airport and sources said the DHSC intended to seek a refund, as it has done in similar situations in the past.
The prime minister's official spokesman said: "All deliveries of PPE are checked to ensure the equipment meets the safety and quality standards our frontline staff need. If equipment does not meet our specifications or pass the assurances processes, it is not issued to the frontline."
Asked why the gowns were not checked before the RAF was sent to collect it, he said: "All items are checked when they get to the UK and before they are sent on to the NHS and I think that's the right approach to ensure that on the ground in the UK, proper checks are carried out."
Turkish sources told the Guardian they were urgently trying to clarify the situation – but added that nobody had approached the country's embassy in London or appeared to have tried to claim replacements or a refund from the supplier, Selegna.
They pointed out that the company had issued a statement to the BBC's Turkish service saying that nobody from the NHS had mentioned a problem when they were in contact earlier in the week and it stood ready to deal with any problems as needed.
"The fabric of the aprons is certified. All products are certified. If there was a problem, they could do research and let us know," said Mehmet Düzen for Selegna.The announcement of the shipment by the communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, on 18 April came at a time when unions and professional bodies were warning that NHS staff may refuse to work without PPE.
Jenrick told the daily Downing Street press briefing that healthcare workers should be "assured that we are doing everything we can to correct this issue", saying they would have the equipment they "need and deserve".
Sources later told the Guardian that the DHSC had advised No 10 not to allow Jenrick to publicise the shipment in case it backfired, but was overruled.
The necessary clearances, it turned out, had not been sought. When the consignment did not arrive on time as promised, the delay prompted hospital leaders to directly attack the government for the first time during the pandemic.
Ministers responded by saying they thought it may only be a one-day delay. Two days later, with the shipment only then beginning to clear Turkish customs checks, they were only able to give an estimate of arrival "in the next few days".
The first planeload of gowns eventually arrived on 22 April, but the next day it was reported that "less than a 10th" of the order had arrived. Now all are expected to be returned.
-key-workers
The saga, first reported by the Telegraph, is one of a series of highly publicised government coronavirus initiatives that have failed to deliver the promised results. Its much-trumpeted "ventilator challenge" asked companies such as Rolls-Royce and Dyson to begin producing the machines, but none have reached the final stages of testing and the majority have proved surplus to requirements.
A DHSC spokesman said: "This is a global pandemic with many countries procuring PPE, leading to shortages around the world, not just the UK.
"We are working night and day to source PPE internationally and domestically, and brought together the NHS, industry and the armed forces to create a comprehensive PPE distribution network to deliver critical supplies to the frontline.
"All deliveries of PPE are checked to ensure the equipment meets the safety and quality standards our frontline staff need. If equipment does not meet our specifications or pass our quality assurance processes, it is not distributed to the frontline."
An update on this story was published on 8 May 2020.