Inmates at child jail in Kent spending just 40 minutes a day out of cells
Inspections of young offender institutions find inconsistencies in measures to prevent spread of Covid-19
Teenage inmates in a children's jail are spending just 40 minutes a day out of their cells due to a restrictive regime in place to tackle the spread of the coronavirus, an inspection report has revealed.
The usual regime in prisons has been suspended, meaning inmates can no longer take part in recreational activities, visit libraries, go to worship or receive visits from friends or family.
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Prisons (HMIP) visited three young offender institutions (YOIs) on 21 April – Parc, near Bridgend, Cookham Wood, in Kent, and Wetherby in West Yorkshire – as part of a programme of short inspections to assess the functioning of the prison estate during the pandemic.
Inspectors found inconsistencies across the three YOIs, which hold around 400 15- to 17-year-olds, in their approaches to the new restrictive regime. Only Parc was continuing to provide face-to-face education, and children there received more than three hours out of their cell each day.
However, the children in Cookham Wood were spending just 40 minutes out of their cells each day, while inmates at Wetherby were out of their cells for about an hour.
Peter Clarke, the chief inspector of prisons, said: "While a reduction in time unlocked was inevitable, the variation between establishments was a concern and raised the question of the need for, and therefore the proportionality of, the most restrictive regimes."
He added: "The government's advice is that those who are deemed vulnerable should be able to attend education in the community. Most children held in custody would meet this definition, and the leaders of all three establishments had wanted to deliver at least some education within public health guidance, so it is hard to see the justification for why such different approaches had been taken."
There have been warnings from penal reform campaigners and the shadow frontbench that the restrictive regime is not sustainable in the long term, despite evidence that it is helping to contain "explosive outbreaks" across the estate.
Public Health England has said to date the number of confirmed cases and deaths within prisons has not been as high as expected. At least 19 prisoners and six prison staff have contracted Covid-19 and died.
Inspectors said the children held in the three YOIs were frustrated that they could not see their friends and families.
Children were provided with additional phone credit, although there were was a "significant difference" in the amounts given at each establishment, for which the inspectors could not find an explanation.
Clarke said managers at all three sites had been slow to implement video calling, which was available only in Parc at the time of the inspection.
All new arrivals, numbers of whom have significantly fallen since the start of the pandemic, are being separated from the rest of the population for 14 days.
Newly arrived children could only see and speak with others who had arrived on the same day, the inspectorate said, so for those arriving by themselves there was no face-to-face interaction with other children for 14 days.
Despite the concerns, Clarke said it was generally a positive set of inspections, with staff found to be interacting with children in a caring, patient and professional way.
All three sites were calm and well ordered, with sufficient staff, the report said, and self-harm had reduced at Parc and Wetherby and was stable at Cookham Wood
A Youth Custody Service spokesperson said: "Inspectors found the young offender institutions have responded swiftly to contain the spread of Covid-19 and keep children and staff safe. We introduced social distancing in line with public health advice and, inevitably, this has temporarily reduced the amount of time children can spend out of their rooms.
"However, as inspectors acknowledged, staff have been creative in providing children with meaningful contact with others through increased in-room activities and children have additional phone credits so they can call family more regularly."