MP says she was sacked as volunteer carer for speaking out on PPE
UK's youngest MP, Labour's Nadia Whittome, 'asked not to return' to retirement home
We would like to hear from key workers in the UK. You can get in touch by filling in the form \nbelow, or by contacting usvia WhatsAppbyclicking hereor\n adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Only the Guardian can see your \ncontributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss \nfurther.
UK's youngest MP, Labour's Nadia Whittome, 'asked not to return' to retirement home
The UK's youngest MP has claimed she was sacked from her temporary role as a carer during the Covid-19 pandemic because she spoke out about personal protective equipment (PPE) shortages.
Labour's Nadia Whittome, 24, MP for Nottingham East, returned to her former role at Lark Hill retirement village, which is run by ExtraCare, to help relieve the strain on the care service.
She had worked there for 18 months before becoming an MP and since returning had been donating her wages to the local Covid-19 relief fund, she told the PA news agency.
On Wednesday evening, Whittome claimed she has been "asked not to return" by ExtraCare. She said she had been accused of "spreading misinformation" about the lack of PPE in the media.
Whittome claimed the reason behind ExtraCare's decision to terminate her role was based on an interview she gave to Newsnight on 24 April about inadequate supply of PPE.
She had previously complained staff were given only one face mask each per day, meaning the same mask was used for multiple residents.
Members of the public donated homemade visors, she said, and the store cupboard containing PPE was locked due to fears staff would steal it to sell on.
Whittome further claimed an onsite "wellbeing nurse" had told staff that masks do not make a difference but they could buy one from Screwfix if it made them feel more comfortable.
The MP said: "I will continue to speak the truth about my frontline experiences and I condemn care companies who try to gag staff for speaking out and raising concerns."
She added: "I can survive being effectively sacked for speaking out because I have another income.
"But for so many people in social care – who work a skilled, exhausting and now dangerous job for poverty pay – speaking out is not an option. This is wrong and dangerous for care home residents and patients."
-key-workers
Whittome is now calling all care staff anywhere in the UK who feel they have faced intimidation or disciplinary action at work for speaking out about PPE shortages to contact her office.
She told PA that ExtraCare made it explicit she was being asked not to return because of her comments about PPE.
The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, tweeted: "Carers, right across our country, are putting their lives on the line for others but they aren't being provided the Personal Protective Equipment they need. No-one should be sacked for speaking out."
ExtraCare, which is a charitable trust, said Whittome returned to work on a casual basis and had worked eight shifts between March and April.
"Our in-house care team are now fulfilling our needs at this time and Nadia's help is no longer needed," it said in a statement.
"At Lark Hill, we have over three months' supply of PPE, including over 25,000 pairs of gloves, 7,700 aprons and nearly 6,000 masks – we have access to further equipment should we need it.
"Reports that we have a PPE shortage are inaccurate and have caused concern amongst our residents – we have had to invest a significant amount of staff time reassuring our residents as a result.
"This has occurred during a critical period when all of our resources have to be focused on protecting our residents' safety and welfare."
Lark Hill, which is in Clifton, Nottingham, is the largest retirement village in the UK and has 419 residents, ExtraCare said.
It added: "As a result of rigorous infection control measures which include a full supply of PPE, we are relieved to report that no deaths have occurred within the Lark Hill community as a result of Covid-19. Our vigilance, care and concern continue."