'You can see the stress': Inverclyde tops Scotland's coronavirus death tables
Worst-hit area has almost double the national rate, but residents say the community is rallying together
Like most Greenock residents, Martin Callander sees evidence of the coronavirus death toll all around him. "It's there every day in the local newspaper. My friend's wife is a funeral director: today she has seven funerals, one every hour." Then there are the losses beyond the official tallies: "Lockdown is really affecting people's mental health. Two friends have committed suicide since this started."
Callander is president of Victoria bowling club, which perches on a hill overlooking the Firth of Clyde. He has been carrying out essential maintenance of the green while his mainly elderly members remain isolated at home. The grass is beginning to brown in the sunshine.
According to the latest figures from the National Records of Scotland, Inverclyde local authority, on Scotland's west coast, has the highest Covid-19 death rate in the country, at 12.7 deaths per 10,000 people. In a week when Scottish daily deaths fell for the first time, this is more than double the national rate of 5.1 and much higher than the next highest rate, in West Dunbartonshire, of 9.7.
A large proportion (18.6%) of Inverclyde is made up of highly deprived areas, and some of the most deprived parts of Scotland are found in Greenock and Port Glasgow.
For Callander, there are too many unanswered questions about the deaths in Inverclyde. "There's not enough testing going on," he says.
Jay, a club member who is helping out with some painting, agrees: "It's shocking. We've hardly heard from politicians."
Inverclyde's council leader, Stephen McCabe, has called on the Scottish government to address regional disparities and demanded an urgent report from Public Health Scotland to help his officers better understand who has been affected and why.
"We have high-density housing, high levels of people with co-morbidities, a high proportion of older people living here, so we knew we were going to be hit, but what surprised us was that we were out in front," says McCabe, a Labour councillor.
"But it can't just be deprivation, otherwise we'd be in the same position as Glasgow. Might it be that our curve was peaking earlier? We have more people dying in hospital than elsewhere: are there questions about the district general hospital?"
Chris McEleny, an SNP councillor, has been raising his own concerns. There's an "angry mood" among local people, he says. "Over the past few decades Inverclyde has always come top of the wrong league tables."
He is insistent about the need for localised testing, adding: "We don't know how our 'R' number compares to other areas, as community transmission information isn't available at a health board or local authority level. It needs to be, otherwise we won't be able to make informed localised decisions about lifting lockdown restrictions."
Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/05/05-61553-gnl.fw.200505.jf.ch7DW.mp3
Analysis published by Public Health Scotland on Wednesday showed that the highest proportion of confirmed cases of Covid-19 in Scotland was among the most deprived 20% of the population, though the agency said testing of key workers could distort these findings. It also noted that people from the most deprived areas were twice as likely to contact community hubs set up by NHS Scotland to deal with suspected cases.
The impact on the community has been tangible, says the Rev Fraser Donaldson, of Hope community church in Greenock. "You can see the stress and worry in people's faces. When people read headlines about Inverclyde being the deprivation capital, or the corona-capital, it brings a great sense of despair. But that is met almost instantly with a challenge, as people come together to help each other."
At the nearby Crawfurdsburn community centre, where volunteers bustle around trestle tables heaving with canned goods and chocolate treats, this is much in evidence.
Coordinating the packing efforts is Laura Reilly, who runs Belville community gardens just up the street. "This wasn't unexpected, we knew people were going to find it hard. It's one thing being locked in a suburban house with a garden and deciding what to watch from Amazon, and another being stuck in a tenement flat with three children and no phone credit.
"People are having to ask for help when they're not used to it, especially the older generation, and they're leaving it so late. One man in Port Glasgow was down to his last banana," she says.
The parcel packers are part of Inverclyde community action response, which has brought together 11 local groups and 350 volunteers since the pandemic was declared. They have delivered 2,000 food boxes, 3,000 hot meals and 500 prescriptions, as well as setting up a daily keep-in-contact phone service, bicycle repairs and fundraising for laptops for children stuck at home without tech.
The organiser, Stephen Henry, says: "If you look on social media, you can see the impact that this is having on the community, and the loss people are feeling." Henry has plans to set up temporary memorials – wooden love hearts where people can write the name of someone who has died – in parks and on the esplanade, which residents can visit on their daily walk.
"There's a lot of negativity around Inverclyde," says Henry, "but if you scratch the surface there's some amazing stuff going on. People are engaging with each other at a human level."