Middlesbrough mayor reopens parks after criticism over stately home
Andy Preston had been accused of ignoring government advice on green spaces
Parks in one of the UK's most deprived towns will reopen after the local mayor was criticised for enjoying the gardens of his own stately home while depriving others of green space.
Andy Preston, a former hedge fund millionaire who was elected the independent mayor of Middlesbrough last year, announced on Twitter on Wednesday that he was going to trial a reopening of three parks he shut at the start of lockdown.
The parks will reopen this Friday for the special bank holiday to celebrate VE day, marking 75 years since the end of the second world war.
He stressed it was only a trial and that the car park at the biggest park, Stewart Park, would remain closed, along with play areas.
In a statement, Preston said: "I closed the parks to protect people and save lives. I know it wasn't universally popular but I'm not here to be popular, I'm here to do what's right for Middlesbrough.
"The parks were closed after major episodes of bad and risky behaviour put innocent children and adults at risk. I'm confident the closure of the parks has saved the lives of Middlesbrough people and now believe the time is right to reopen the parks, with more council staff available to support police in ensuring rules are adhered."
On Tuesday the Guardian reported how the local Labour MP, Andy McDonald, had criticised Preston for his refusal to heed government advice and reopen the parks.
McDonald suggested it was particularly hypocritical as Preston lives in a vast country estate 25 miles from Middlesbrough, once described by Country Living as "a magnificent home with superb topiary and beautiful stables".
Preston accepted he lived in a "nice big house" but said he cared deeply about those less fortunate than himself. "I don't pretend my life is like other people's. But I do everything I can to understand their lives and represent them," he said.
On Wednesday he insisted the decision had nothing to do with media coverage of the controversy. "We've come under pressure locally and nationally to reopen the parks. The time wasn't right then but it is now. This is our decision and our decision only – I hope I can trust people to follow the rules so everyone can enjoy some exercise in the parks," he said.