Child mental health was in crisis before Covid-19. We can't go back to 'normal'
Vulnerable children will be even more at risk when the lockdown is lifted
Coronavirus doesn't affect everybody equally – it affects those on the frontline disproportionately. A similar myth has spread about mental health: while anybody can experience mental health problems, they disproportionately affect children who have suffered adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) such as abuse, parental mental health problems, drug use, incarceration or domestic violence. These ACEs are compounded by poverty, poor education and hopelessness for the future.
How such families are coping in lockdown is still unknown. When the coronavirus curve starts to flatten, what will become of the mental health curve that was snowballing pre-Covid 19 as a consequence of psychosocial upheaval and austerity?
The large child and adolescent mental health services team I work for has been running waiting lists of a number of months for a first appointment, and then equally long waits for specialist therapies such as cognitive behavioural therapy or art therapy. Trying to absorb dozens of referrals a week, many of which are highly complex, is a truly Sisyphean task.
Post-lockdown referral rates have, however, plummeted. Teenagers who would have previously overdosed and presented at A&amp;E are avoiding hospital; parents queue for hours to get a consultation with their GP or don't contact them at all. Referrals from schools are currently zero. What a wonderful time to catch up and get our waiting lists down.
But there are a lot of teenagers who don't want to speak on the phone. Others can't because their household is too busy and chaotic. Support services we may have previously redirected referrals to are shut. Not all clinicians have the necessary equipment to work from home.
Testing for Covid-19 has only been available in the last week or so and is patchily available, so staff who are self-isolating have to stay home, and there's a bare skeleton staff in work. We've been slow to embrace technology, so can't text young people to check in with them.
Messages from leadership are confused: should we be contacting new patients or shoring up the old ones? Making sure we're ready for inspection or finding creative means to reach out?
Even if we can check in with families and young people, mental health interventions rely so much on being able to see someone and understand what is being said without words. Some input – trauma work, for example – is risky to carry out over the phone.
There are some families I have spoken to who are thriving in the lockdown. Some children with autistic spectrum condition, struggling to get into noisy, busy, chaotic schools that are almost set up to make life difficult for them, have had their wishes granted by school closures.
Some socially anxious children are revelling in the fact that they don't have to test out their fears. But we are very much in the honeymoon period with lockdown, where NHS staff, social care workers and teachers are being applauded, and other previously neglected professional sectors are being treated with praise and the warmth they richly deserve.
We have no precedent to guide us once this honeymoon period ends, nothing to suggest what will happen when these massively overstretched services get back to normal. My worry is that we will simply place vulnerable children back in the same situations that were causing a mental health epidemic pre-coronavirus. As the economic fallout of all this reveals itself painfully over the coming weeks and months and those with the least are once again disproportionately affected, how will services that were already creaking under the strain manage?
If you work in mental health, particularly with children and adolescents, there is always hope for the future. Lives can change so radically, from a person being suicidal and hopeless at 15 to finishing college at 18; from being in a domestically violent and frightening home at five to moving up to secondary school in a loving adopted family at 11. In order to safeguard the mental health of children and young people in the UK, how much of the old normal do we really want to keep?
If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series about experiences in healthcare during the coronavirus outbreak, get in touch by emailing sarah.johnson@theguardian.com
In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.