Lego, learning and laughter: how libraries are thriving in lockdown
UK libraries are at the heart of local communities as eborrowing soars, printers turn out PPE, and staff get creative online
"Such a lot of our work is about social interaction. Especially in smaller libraries, we're sometimes the only ones people see in a week," says Carol Stump, chief librarian at Kirklees council in West Yorkshire. "We wanted to be sure that with libraries in lockdown, people could still access our services. And we felt they might be glad of a chat."
Stump runs a team of 110 library staff. Many of them have been redeployed during the pandemic, but those still working for the library service are keeping in touch with local people, particularly those over 70. Calls help people feel less isolated, and library staff can check whether they have enough food and medical supplies, or need other support. One 90-year-old man, for example, was missing his regular trip to the library to read the local paper, but is now able to read it online. "It's gone down so well. People have been so grateful," says Stump.
The sudden switch from a physical space to online has been challenging for staff and users, but has also highlighted the vital role of library services and the skills of staff. From Orkney's Lego challenge to Truro's storytime at home sessions, librarians are coming up with innovative ways to stay engaged with users and each other.
While many library staff have been redeployed to emergency roles with their councils, such as working on telephone helplines, packing and distributing care packages, and working as registrars, those still in their core roles are seeing demand leap for all kinds of digital services.
Online borrowing has soared since 23 March, when the UK went into lockdown. Hampshire, for instance, has reported a 770% increase in uptake of its digital services. In east Yorkshire, library staff are working with a local radio station to encourage children to join their Big Spring Read-In, while Manchester libraries are running a creative challenge for young people.
In Suffolk, a new online advice service has been launched. "It's easy to forget what we do as public librarians, which is provide information you can trust," explains Krystal Vittles, head of Suffolk library service delivery. "Some question why we need librarians for this when we have the internet, but even the most internet-savvy people are worried about what to trust, and we are trained for this." It also enables staff to have a conversation, albeit online, with people as they would in real life. "We can have a bit of a laugh with the customers."
Librarians are using social media to share lighter moments with one another, too, such as a Twitter conversation about interesting bookmarks they've found in library books, including an After Eight mint still in its wrapper and a Blockbuster card ("a proper ancient artefact").
Staff and readers are also creating huge amounts of online content, with one rhyme time by a library regular shielding at home reaching more than 2,000 views.
Librarian Ian Anstice, editor of Public Libraries News, has written that the pandemic has highlighted the ingenuity and ability of library staff. "Covid-19 has been to library services the equivalent of what the second world war was to arms manufacturing," he writes. "Suddenly, within a week in lots of cases, librarians have switched to online services. How good that makes library services look to their councils."
Being able to prove the value of services to their communities, and being appreciated by local politicians, is welcome news for many libraries after years of cuts – in the year to March 2018, 127 British libraries closed, with 35 more closures the following year.
There has also been investment during the crisis. Arts Council England has announced a £1,000 grant for each of the 151 public library services in England to help them purchase new digital stock.
Libraries are finding innovative ways to use resources, including using 3D printers and laser cutters to produce PPE equipment. In Gateshead, where libraries recently became part of the council's public health service, a small dedicated team began by printing face mask valves for local hospital staff and has now moved on to produce visors for local care homes, using a network of 3D printers in libraries and people's homes.
"The team has now delivered nearly 2,200 visors to more than 50 different local care homes," says Stephen Walters, Gateshead council's principal library manager. "The appreciation has been overwhelming. One home applauded the driver as he made deliveries."
Walters says staff have been working flat out. "I felt like a Victorian mill owner," he says. "They even had to be persuaded to take Sundays off."
As in other areas, some of Gateshead's library staff have been redeployed. One employee helped a resident get his utilities restored after they had been off for weeks. "Library employees are perfectly suited to this new role," says Walters. "They are inherently creative and positive, and deal with diverse customer needs through their normal work. This is just a greatly enhanced version of what they do day to day."
