Ellie Orton: 'The £92m we've raised for the NHS will never replace state funding'
Thanks to Captain Tom and its coronavirus appeal, NHS Charities Together has reached its five-year aim in five weeks, says its head
It's just six weeks since NHS Charities Together (NHSCT), the then little-known membership body for local health service fundraisers, launched a NHS coronavirus appeal in place of the annual tea parties that used to be its main money-spinner. It has since had to expand its team from four to 25 and has raised an astounding £92m, sending it rocketing into the UK fundraising elite.
For Ellie Orton, the organisation's chief executive, the transformation has been breathtaking. Last year, the tea parties raised £160,000. On the first day of the new appeal, she picked up the phone to a single offer of £10m. "In terms of income, the profile and the understanding of NHS trusts and boards that charity could be a key partner – well, instead of accomplishing that in five years as we had hoped under our strategic plan, it's pretty much been done in five weeks," she says.
But the stunning turnaround brings challenges. Not the least, Orton knows, will be countering the suspicion that the sudden outpouring of public monetary support for the NHS opens the door for the government to backslide on exchequer funding. If people's spontaneous generosity of recent days could be developed into long-term commitment, the Treasury would be very happy indeed. "We have a responsibility to continue to tell the story that the charities are here to help by providing support above and beyond [core funding]," she says. "It's a symbiotic relationship: one doesn't replace the other."
There are 234 local NHS charities in the UK and many of them predate the founding of the health service in 1948. The biggest and most well-known is the Great Ormond Street Hospital Children's Charity, which raised £87m in 2018-19 to support the famous London children's hospital, but others are far smaller affairs measuring success in tens of thousands of pounds. Overall, they routinely contribute more than £1m every day to NHS causes.
While they all stress that they are supplementing taxpayer funding, and paying for extras rather than for basics such as personal protective equipment (PPE) for health workers or ventilators for patients during the current crisis, the ground rules are not as clear as is commonly supposed. An official review in 2012 concluded that "there is no hard and fast rule that charities must not subsidise or replace public services".
Orton's organisation – itself a charity – was established in 2009 as the Association of NHS Charities, although founding members had been meeting informally since 2000 to swap campaign ideas and good practice. When she arrived as chief executive in 2018, there were 120 members. Before the Covid-19 appeal was launched, there were 140. By last week, there were 202 as remaining non-members scrambled to join to be eligible for a share of the swelling pot.
Undoubtedly the most famous contributor to the appeal is 100-year-old Tom Moore – "Captain Tom", though last week promoted to the honorary rank of colonel for his fundraising walks that have netted an extraordinary £33m "for the NHS". Other donors include the Duke of Westminster, finance company XTX Markets, which made that £10m commitment on the first day, and Tetrapak billionaire Hans Rausing and his wife, Julia, who have given £5m. Much more cash is on the way from, among others, Premier League footballers who are supporting the Players Together initiative and Serious Tissues, a recycled toilet paper brand donating 100% of profits.
Orton, who is a keen runner and has taken part in Run for Heroes, which has raised more than £5m for the appeal, says money is being distributed among member charities in the first instance to provide immediate wellbeing support for NHS workers, patients and volunteers according to local priorities. She mentions groceries, toiletries and even tablet computers, while examples on NHSCT's website include grant recipient Leeds Cares, which is using cash to enable hospital patients to have free TV and phone calls that would otherwise cost up to £7 a day for the bedside service, and the Maudsley Charity, which has bought games and activities for young patients on the Maudsley hospital's mental health wards and in the community in south London.
A second tranche of funds will go to supporting what she calls "wider partnerships". In this, she sees local NHS charities acting as "a bridge between the voluntary sector and the NHS", perhaps enabling community groups to support people either self-isolating at home or convalescing after suffering with the virus.
The third category of grants will support the long-term recovery of NHS workers and volunteers after the immediate crisis has passed. Many will need continuing psychological help, she says, and some who have contracted the virus may be unable to return to work or volunteering for a considerable time. But she stresses that this will ultimately benefit all of us. "The point of NHS charities is that the beneficiary is the patient," she says. "Funds can go to staff, because that enables them to support the patient to the best of their ability."
Orton and her team have been working round the clock since deciding to launch the appeal. A sub-group of NHSCT's governing board is meeting, online, twice weekly to ensure money is going out to member charities as swiftly as possible. All the staff, who include temporary paid workers but also volunteers furloughed from member charities that have suspended their own activities, are working remotely away from the organisation's offices in Warwick.
This way of working is familiar to Orton, who previously built a team of 26 working entirely remotely when she ran the Jon Egging Trust, a youth charity. Her background is in youth work, but she says she has always specialised in partnership building across agencies and sectors. When she earlier worked in the faith sector, she spent time in South Africa where she adopted the philosophy of Ubuntu, or humanity, which she translates into her management style as: "I need you to be the best that you can be so that I can be the best that I can be."
Looking ahead, she agrees that things will never be the same again for NHSCT. Almost overnight, its brand has been established as the national focus of giving to the NHS as a UK-wide entity and its scale has exploded: in 2019-20, she says, its income was about £400,000; this year, it is heading fast towards £150m.
While that figure will inevitably fall back sharply after the crisis, Orton can surely be confident of it staying in the tens of millions. But she is keeping her feet firmly on the ground. "The reality is I am not a frontline member of NHS staff working 12 or 14 hours a day in PPE kit," she says. "Understanding just how difficult that can be gives me some perspective about where I and the organisation fit in to all this."
Age: 45.
Lives: Warwickshire.
Family: Married, three children.
Education: St Joseph's Convent School, Kenilworth; Oxford Brookes University (BA youth and community studies with applied theology).
Career: 2018-present: chief executive, NHS Charities Together; 2018: interim chief executive, Kairos Women Working Together; 2014-2017: head of youth programmes, then interim chief executive, Jon Egging Trust; 2004-14: youth and community worker, Warwickshire council; 1994-2004: youth and community worker, Church of England.
Interests: Running, hiking, camping, Sunday family film.
Before you post, we'd like to thank you for joining the debate - we're glad you've chosen to participate and we value your opinions and experiences.
Please choose your username under which you would like all your comments to show up. You can only set your username once.
Please keep your posts respectful and abide by the community guidelines - and if you spot a comment you think doesn't adhere to the guidelines, please use the 'Report' link next to it to let us know.
Please preview your comment below and click 'post' when you're happy with it.