RNLI could cover fewer beaches if lockdown is eased
About 35% of RNLI staff have been furloughed and work on boats and stations has been halted
The Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) is planning to provide lifeguard cover on about a third of the beaches it normally patrols if the lockdown is eased.
Usually 1,600 lifeguards keep watch at 248 beaches around the UK and the Channel Islands but the charity is drawing up plans to cover about 70 of its usual spots in high summer if government guidance allows.
RNLI planners are ploughing through data to pinpoint factors such as the busiest beaches and those where they have carried out the most rescues to work out which ones to patrol.
They will also try to get an even spread of beaches around the UK to discourage a rush towards one well-guarded region.
Earlier in the Covid-19 crisis, the RNLI warned it would be very difficult to suddenly ramp up its service because not enough lifeguards would have been trained.
But it is planning to try to get around this by using experienced lifeguards who can be trained quickly, rather than taking on new ones.
RNLI chief executive, Mark Dowie, said: "The RNLI is incredibly proud of its highly skilled lifeguards who work alongside the lifeboat crews, HM Coastguard and other emergency services.
"RNLI lifeguards are professional lifesavers and will be essential when the lockdown is lifted and people head to our coastlines and enjoy our beaches.
"The current situation means that the operational logistics and training behind setting up a lifeguard service – normally in full swing at the moment – have had to stop.
"Re-establishing this infrastructure and distributing equipment to beaches will take time. And we must also make sure that conditions are safe for our lifeguards to provide an effective service – our priority remains the safety of our people and the public.
"But despite these challenges, and given enough notice of lockdown lifting, we're hoping to put lifeguard patrols on around 70 beaches.
"We are planning for a service that we can adapt to changes in government guidelines and restrictions. We don't know what social distancing restrictions will be in place, or whether we'll have periods where restrictions are relaxed and then reintroduced."
About 35% of RNLI staff have been furloughed. The charity has suspended the building of boats and work on lifeboat stations but its 238 bases remain operational and have been launching during the lockdown.
The RNLI is urging everyone to follow government guidance and recommends that the permitted daily exercise is not on or in the sea.