Number of key workers getting Covid-19 overtakes positive tests in hospitals
Figures prompt renewed calls to ensure health and social workers have PPE needed
The number of key workers and members of their families who are testing positive for Covid-19 has overtaken the number of sick people testing positive in hospitals.
Figures showing that 2,067 key workers had tested positive at a new daily count prompted calls for a greater focus on how and why health and social workers were contracting coronavirus and for assurances that they were continuing to get the personal protective equipment (PPE) needed.
The number of key workers and family members testing positive reflects a major ramping up in testing for that cohort, known as "Pillar 2" of the government's testing strategy, but experts say it also emphasises where recent new cases are occurring.
On Sunday, 42,336 were tested under Pillar 2, more than double those in Pillar 1 which covers swab-testing in Public Health England labs and NHS hospitals for those with a clinical need, and also includes some health and care workers.
But the stark significance of daily positive tests among key workers and their families overtaking that for the hospital patients, which was 1,918, was highlighted by experts and representatives of healthcare workers on a day when the government's chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, warned MPs that there was a risk of infections breaking back out into the community from hospitals and care homes.
A Royal College of Nursing (RCN) spokesperson said: "The reality is that health and care workers are at increased risk from this virus simply by doing their job.
"These figures reinforce the urgent need for proper fitting protective equipment to be provided to all healthcare professionals, so they can protect themselves, their families and their patients."
Government data showed that out of 20,620 people tested in hospitals and labs the percentage of positive results was 9.3%, while out of 42,336 tests carried out for health, social care and other essential workers and their households, the percentage of positive results was 4.8%.
Epidemiologist Anne Johnson at University College London said it was good news that transmission of Covid-19 in general community settings was now being suppressed, but a greater degree of investigation into the transmission of coronavirus in health and social settings, including among healthcare staff, was needed.
"The lockdown has been successful in that it has very much reduced transmissions between households and that is to be welcomed. But where a lot of the infection can take place is within households and in a hospital and social care setting. That is now where we need to see a lot more detailed data about the people who are testing positive for Covid-19.
"If you look at those cases there are people who have recently been infected. It suggests to me that a lot of the new infections, quite a high proportion is happening in health and social care settings and among other key workers and their families."
Dr Samantha Batt-Rawden, president of the Doctors' Association UK, a grassroots group lobbying for the medical profession and wider NHS, said that its fears about the risks to healthcare workers appeared to be well founded on the basis of the latest figures.
"The Doctors' Association UK has been lobbying NHS England to monitor and publish rates of healthcare worker infection for many weeks now as part of our Protect the Frontline campaign," she said.
"Although we cannot conflate correlation with causality we have always suggested that this may act as a surrogate marker for how well the UK's guidance on PPE is faring. We remain incredibly concerned that healthcare workers are at considerable risk, partly due to a lack of appropriate PPE.
"It appears looking at these numbers that those fears are well founded. We would now urge the Department of Health and NHS England to produce more detailed data on healthcare worker infections so we can protect NHS staff on the frontline as a matter of urgency."
Describing the figures as "disturbing", the TSSA rail workers union said they underlined the need to make key workers' safety a "number one priority".
"In public transport, it also means not ramping up services prematurely and certainly not before physical distancing of at least 2 metres between our members and passengers can be guaranteed at all times," said the TSSA general secretary, Manuel Cortes.
A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: "We are making it fast and simple for all eligible people who need a test to get one."
The spokesperson added that the government had more than doubled the capacity of the NHS and Public Health England laboratories, and was working to ensure protective equipment gets to staff who need it.
The health secretary, Matt Hancock, told parliament that testing of asymptomatic NHS staff would be rolled out further after successful pilots in 60 trusts.