Eurostar backtracks over coronavirus refunds after complaints
Customers say they were denied cancellation repayments and pushed to accept unusable vouchers
Eurostar is to offer more generous cancellation terms and has promised cash refunds after facing a backlash from customers furious at its previous refunds stance.
With French borders still closed to all tourist traffic, Eurostar has been forced to cancel all but two trains a day out of London, leaving thousands of passengers with unusable tickets.
Easter trips to Disneyland in Paris and a host of other cities were all cancelled.
Like the airlines, Eurostar has pushed customers into accepting replacement vouchers, which it said had to be used to make a booking by the end of September – a date regarded as far too soon for many of its customers, particularly older travellers.
But after facing a growing backlash from customers – some of whom said they would never use the service again – Eurostar is now allowing up to a year to rebook trips, which can start six or nine months after that. It has also confirmed it will refund tickets for those whose trains were cancelled.
Guardian Money has been inundated by unhappy Eurostar passengers who claimed they were denied the refunds, and that the policy terms made the vouchers all but unusable.
People aged over 70 complained they would be unlikely to be able make ticket bookings by September for travel before April.
Passengers also complained that trains were only being cancelled 48 hours before they were set to depart, in an apparent bid to get customers to accept vouchers rather than refunds.
A Eurostar spokesman said the reason trains were being cancelled late was to help ease traffic to its customer service operation.
"We apologise if some of your readers have not found this process as simple as we would like, but we are working to process a high-volume of enquiries to support our customers and offer flexibility with travel arrangements at this time.
"Vouchers are valid for bookings 12 months from the date they are issued, so in theory customers could receive a voucher and use it for travel up to late 2021. Travellers on cancelled trains are also entitled to a refund to the full value of the cancelled journey, in line with their conditions of carriage," he said.
In a statement issued on Monday, Eurostar's chief executive, Mike Cooper, said: "On behalf of everyone at Eurostar, thank you for your understanding at a difficult time. The situation is changing by the hour, and both you – our customers – and our teams are facing unprecedented challenges."