Fast walking, light relief and a comic's supermarket rejection
Three stories to bring a glint of joy amid the coronavirus gloom
As the headlines continues to be unrelentingly grim, there are still some stories out there to bring a smile to your face – from charity challenges to shows of support for the NHS.
Following the success of Capt Tom Moore's fundraising effort, another centenarian has pledged to do laps of his garden to raise money for charity – but this time with an added challenge.
Dabirul Islam Choudhury is raising money for those affected by the virus in the UK and Bangladesh by walking laps of his community garden while fasting for Ramadan. The 100-year-old began walking 100 laps of the 80-metre garden on 26 April to raise £1,000, but hit the target within hours.
Since then Choudhury's JustGiving page has raised more than £60,000 for the Ramadan Family Commitment (RFC) Covid-19 crisis initiative, run by British-Bangladeshi television broadcaster Channel S. He plans to continue fundraising for the entire month of Ramadan, which takes place this year from 23 April 23to 23 May, while continuing to observe religious fasting.
Choudhury was born on 1 January 1920 in British Assam, now modern-day Bangladesh, and moved to London to study English literature in 1957. His son, Atique Choudhury, told BBC London: "When we started, we started at a small pace but he's been increasing his number of laps he's doing. The problem we have is that we have to try and stop him because he wants to carry on."
A teenager in Somerset has paid tribute to NHS staff by lighting up local landmark the Glastonbury Tor in blue. Inspired by a similar initiative at Windsor Castle, 18-year-old Sam Wardel used two small LED floodlights to illuminate the Grade 1 listed structure. He has so far staged his light show every two weeks, but now says he will do it every Thursday.
He told the BBC: "I had seen some houses and Windsor Castle had been lit up in blue… so I wanted to do something bigger to show my appreciation for everything the NHS has been doing.
"I just happened to look out of the kitchen window at the tower," Wardel said. "I thought why don't I go up there so everyone can see it for miles around."
Comedian Jason Manford has revealed he applied for a job at his local Tesco to help get groceries to people when the crisis first started. Tesco thanked him for his application, but said that since it came after the deadline, they couldn't offer him the position.
Manford applied for a customer assistant position at the supermarket's Aldery Road Express store in Wilmslow, Cheshire, when the chain advertised for more staff to help them with the increased demand during the pandemic in March.
He said he had applied as he felt it was "basically wartime and it would require all hands on deck". The comedian joked on Twitter that he had even said on his CV: "Previous experience: Comedian. So I know that it's all in the delivery!" He has since helped out doing volunteer driving for other organisations.
A spokesman for Tesco said: "We've recruited around 50,000 temporary workers during the coronavirus pandemic and they have played a huge part in helping us to serve customers safely during these unprecedented times.
"Jason's skills would have no doubt brought a lot of joy to our customers and colleagues, so it's a shame he didn't make the deadline for this vacancy. But should he ever want to join the Tesco family in the future, we'd be happy to receive an application from him."