UK can avoid Covid-19 second wave with test, track and trace, says Vallance
R, or the 'effective reproduction number', is a way of rating a disease's ability to spread. It's the average number of people on to whom one infected person will pass the virus. For an R of anything above 1, an epidemic will grow exponentially. Anything below 1 and an outbreak will fizzle out – eventually.
At the start of the coronavirus pandemic, the estimated R for coronavirus was between 2 and 3 – higher than the value for seasonal flu, but lower than for measles. That means each person would pass it on to between two and three people on average, before either recovering or dying, and each of those people would pass it on to a further two to three others, causing the total number of cases to snowball over time.
The reproduction number is not fixed, though. It depends on the biology of the virus; people's behaviour, such as social distancing;and a population's immunity. A country may see regional variations in its R number, depending on local factors like population density and transport patterns.
Hannah Devlin<i>Science correspondent</i>
Chief scientific adviser says he is optimistic if UK also adheres to physical distancing
The UK should be able to avoid a second wave of infections from coronavirus if it gets testing, tracking and tracing right alongside adhering to physical distancing measures, the government's chief scientific adviser has said.
Speaking at a meeting of parliament's health and social care committee on management of the coronavirus outbreak, Sir Patrick Vallance said he was on the "optimistic side".
"I think if we do test, track and tracing well and we keep the social distancing measures at the right level we should be able to avoid a second wave," he said.
But, he added, "winter is going to be extremely difficult when you also have flu circulating and you have all the other respiratory infections which can get confused with this".
It remains unclear what rate of new infections a day would need to be reached in order for a contact tracing programme to be able to cope.
Speaking at the select committee meeting, Jenny Harries, deputy chief medical officer for England, said such figures would depend on data such as results of trials of the new NHS app now being tested on the Isle of Wight, which could shed light on the number of contacts an average person has.
R, or the 'effective reproduction number', is a way of rating a disease's ability to spread. It's the average number of people on to whom one infected person will pass the virus. For an R of anything above 1, an epidemic will grow exponentially. Anything below 1 and an outbreak will fizzle out – eventually.
At the start of the coronavirus pandemic, the estimated R for coronavirus was between 2 and 3 – higher than the value for seasonal flu, but lower than for measles. That means each person would pass it on to between two and three people on average, before either recovering or dying, and each of those people would pass it on to a further two to three others, causing the total number of cases to snowball over time.
The reproduction number is not fixed, though. It depends on the biology of the virus; people's behaviour, such as social distancing;and a population's immunity. A country may see regional variations in its R number, depending on local factors like population density and transport patterns.
Hannah Devlin<i>Science correspondent</i>
"If you look at the number of individuals related to each symptomatic case, then you can work out how many symptomatic cases you can manage within your contact tracing system," she said. "But I think we need a little bit more information as well from the work that is ongoing now to test out the theory and practice."
The government set a target of recruiting 18,000 contact tracers by mid-May, but Harries was unable to say how many cases such a team would be able to handle, although she said estimates had been made.
Questions also remain about the testing capacity needed for such an approach, with Harries saying that depended on a number of factors including the prevalence of the disease, the capacity of contact tracers to follow up on cases, public behaviour, and the proportion of people using digital approaches such as the NHS app.
"I think the 100,000 [tests a day] puts us in a very good place to start looking at that process, but the work on the Isle of Wight will start to signal some of those parameters and that will give us some of the numbers we need for this conversation," she said.
Harries defended the move to stop community testing and tracing in March, suggesting that as the number of cases rapidly increased there was not enough capacity for testing or enough resources to continue to trace contacts of those with the virus.
But she said the situation was now very different, with the reproductive number (R) – the number of people infected by one infected person – now below 1, compared with about three at the start of the outbreak.
"What we have done, or rather what the public has done, by managing social distancing measures with very strong compliance is to push that rate [of transmission] down and remove a lot of that transmission in the population and then as we come out [of lockdown], we should be able to control and identify many of the cases as they come up," said Harries.
But, she added, "this has to be a very, very steady and slow approach with careful observation of what happens. I wouldn't like to give the impression this will resolve everything."
Vallance also stressed observation was crucial as lockdown measures were eased. "Nothing is going to be risk free. Everything as we go back to less social distancing will carry a risk of there being an outbreak somewhere or a few more cases, or in worst case scenario, R goes above 1," he said.
"We need a very effective surveillance system to pick that up which needs to be run nationally but needs to have local granularity."