Snubbing local expertise in favour of private Covid-19 tracing is a disaster
Councils have been crucial in tackling coronavirus. It's dangerous of the government to dismiss their expertise now
During a global pandemic, the effects we really feel are local. Covid-19 has had a devastating impact on communities, particularly poor communities. People have lost grandparents, parents and children, uncles, aunts, sisters and brothers. The daily government press conference reveals statistics but every single one is a person, a much-loved human being, not a faceless number or a component of a herd.
Key workers in local government know this better than most. Councils have been absolutely critical to tackling the spread of coronavirus. Every day they maintain crucial services. They have set up community hubs and have built on existing local teams. They provide food and shelter to people at risk, help local businesses stay afloat and have mobilised volunteers on a scale we have never seen before.
But they could play an even greater role. As the government begins to talk of lockdown lifting, it's councils that are best placed to lead the next crucial stage: tracing and testing.
Not only are councils naturally placed to respond quickly to the distinct needs, challenges and infection rates of their own area, but they are equipped with their own teams of public health professionals. All they need is the permission – and resources – from Westminster.
It would seem an obvious fit. Instead, in a pattern that is becoming all too familiar, the government has opted to centralise and outsource. Testing will sit with the Department for Health and Social Care, and the tracking of the virus' spread will be in the hands of two private call centre operators.
It is a dangerous dismissal of the expertise and dedication already in place at local level, at the time we need it most.
As the former chief executive of Wigan council, and now as chair of Bolton NHS foundation trust, I have seen firsthand the incredible work of public health and environmental health teams who work to test, track, trace and treat people with sexually transmitted diseases, hepatitis and HIV. They involve GPs, local NHS trusts and the local community to ensure no stone goes unturned. I've been out to accompany these impressive multi-agency frontline teams and witnessed the supportive conversations they have with sex workers, homeless people and recent migrants to the UK.
The staff have had the right training and have local knowledge about which GPs to speak to. They know who in the local community centre will know where a person lives so they can receive lifesaving treatment. And we should now be using these well-tested approaches to tackle coronavirus.
Sometimes it isn't just algorithms and apps that solve global issues. It's concerted local intelligence followed up by local action.
The success of the localised German approach speaks for itself. Health staff in Bavaria tracked and traced the single canteen salt shaker  that had spread Covid-19 around the entire factory, allowing the regional government to quickly put in place its own policies to stop the virus spreading.
How was the 1854 catastrophic cholera outbreak in London stopped? It was when local physician John Snow observed exactly how it was spreading. The source of infection was the water in the pump where people gathered their daily supply. The best course of action was simple: remove the handle. It worked.
Local government has a similar ability to find the salt pot or remove the handle of the pump. It can get to where an app or a person in contact centre hundreds of miles away cannot. We have been doing it for hundreds of years.
But our government seems to have opted for a tactical, national approach, rather than a strategic localised approach.
A new national contact centre managed by the private sector would be a disaster. It removes the ability to link into local knowledge, and existing tracking and tracing systems already in place in experienced public health and environmental health teams. New, centrally located staff will need to be trained.
And at the end of the day, they will probably just send any information they find to the local NHS, council or sustainability and transformation partnership anyway, to be interpreted again. It's a devastating waste of time.
As we clap for our key workers, a lot of us have found a new belief in local government, in local systems and in communities. I know from experience that if we match this belief with autonomy and investment, councils can work wonders.
Donna Hall, the former chief executive of Wigan council, is chair of the Bolton NHS foundation trust and the New Local Government Network.
This article was amended on 6 May 2020. An earlier version said the source of a cholera infection was the handle of a water pump. The infection was waterborne and removing the handle removed access to the water.