Higher PPE costs of care homes passed on to clients, UK charity says
Care companies not receiving enough government funding, Age UK says
Care home providers are passing on the costs of personal protective equipment to residents – with one charging more than £6 a day – after the government failed to deliver all of the promised funding during the pandemic, a leading charity has said.
Age UK said businesses in the care sector had to pay inflated prices because funding was not filtering through, while a union said some workers were having to pay for protective gloves, masks and gowns before they entered the homes.
The Dorset-based care company Agincare faced criticism on Monday over its decision to charge £6.47 extra per day to cover PPE and other rising costs in its homes, including staff cover and statutory sick pay.
Agincare, which runs 23 homes in the south of England, defended the additional charge because of extra staff costs and the rise in the price of purchasing PPE.
PPE amounted to £70,000 extra a month but was "less than 30% of the total [extra] cost", its chairman, Derek Luckhurst, told the BBC. The company employs 4,000 people and made a profit of £2.36m in 2018.
Janette Urquijo, whose 93-year-old mother lives in one of the company's care homes, said she received an invoice for £194.10 for April, in addition to the monthly fee of over £4,000. She said: "I think it is outrageous that they are charging my mother £6.47 per day for the staff to wear PPE [including] for two weeks when the staff did not wear PPE."
Luckhurst said: "This is a temporary measure and it will be reviewed on a monthly basis and any additional costs will be considered."
Age UK said the main reason for the charging is that some of the £1.6bn given to local councils by government to cover care home costs in the coronavirus crisis has not been passed on.
Caroline Abrahams, the charity director at Age UK, said: "It's really important that care companies get the additional funding that is due because otherwise the cost is simply likely to be passed on to residents and their families."
She continued: "This is a deeply anxious time for all care home residents and their families and the last thing they need is a significant hike in their bills. The best way of avoiding this is for central government to give councils and their local care providers the additional funding they need to keep going through the pandemic, at a time when huge demand means the cost of PPE has gone sky high."
Care England, which represents 3,800 care homes and their owners, said local government should stop making a distinction between state-funded and privately-funded residents in allocating the crisis funding.
Prof Martin Green, Care England's chief executive, said: "The government has poured £1.6bn into local authorities to help adult social care with Covid-related costs. PPE for residents and staff are of course Covid-related costs; they are essential.
"Unfortunately, these monies have not reached the frontline and the Local Government Association seems adamant that funding is only for state-funded residents, in a sector where pure self-funders make up 45%. This is not helpful and discriminatory to boot."
Care England was unable to confirm if any other private care home businesses had introduced PPE surcharges on residents or their families during the pandemic.
The union representing around 200,000 care home workers said some care employers are rationing safety kit or keeping essential supplies locked away entirely.
A Unison senior national officer, Gavin Edwards, said: "That's forced staff to buy their own gloves, masks and sanitiser – one had to fork out several hundred pounds of her own hard-earned cash. Staff are fearful and want to protect themselves, their families and the elderly they care for. No employer should be putting staff in this intolerable position."
The National Care Association has also said it was "unsustainable" that care homes are having to pay extra costs for PPE, while the government has removed VAT for the same protective equipment in the NHS.