'Guinea pigs': Isle of Wight residents give mixed welcome to contact tracing app
Coronavirus app being trialled on island as part of plans to prevent second outbreak
Isle of Wight residents have complained they have been "left in the dark" about trials of a pilot NHS coronavirus contact tracing app on the island as part of UK government plans to prevent a second wave of infections.
The plans have nonetheless been welcomed in principle, although people are concerned that the app, which uses bluetooth technology to register contact between users when they come within about 2 metres of each other for at least 15 minutes, would only be truly effective after the lockdown has been eased.
"It's a good idea, but there are fears it will be used as an excuse to lift the lockdown early here. It has been communicated very badly and we feel like we have been left in the dark. We found out about it on the news when Grant Shapps [the transport secretary] announced it. Are they going to send us a letter or knock on our doors to tell us to download it? Still, I will use the app, and encourage others to do so."
"It is important that we learn from other countries like Germany and South Korea which adopted a test, track and trace approach. Having a pilot on an island makes sense and, as we have a relatively low number of cases, it could be a safe place to do it. It will be the only way to get out of the lockdown which is causing many a great deal of economic hardship, isolation and stress."
"Is the Isle of Wight a valid place to test anything to do with coronavirus? We have an elderly population and only 127 cases [as of Sunday], the fifth lowest per capita in the country. We have had no contact whatsoever about this. We don't know if this means we will effectively be guinea pigs for the easing of the nationwide lockdown. I'm happy to try, but I don't know if the island is the best place for it."
"I am supportive of trialling the technology but not if it requires the early lifting of lockdown or social distancing, which I'm assured it will not. The efficacy of this app may soon be called into question if it does not register contact between people who have not been together long enough or by providing false positives if people are in close proximity but have a wall dividing them."
"I have isolated since the day over-70s were told to and I only go out for short walks when no one is about using my access to webcam at the bay which shows the footfall at the time. I'm afraid that if people have got an app they may think that since they are being tracked there is no need to worry about abiding by the lockdown."