HS2 protesters block sites and call for money to go to NHS
HS2 Rebellion says money spent on construction should instead be used for coronavirus medical supplies
Demonstrators have blocked access to building sites for the HS2 high-speed railway in London and Warwickshire, in protest at construction work continuing amid the coronavirus crisis.
The group, which calls itself HS2 Rebellion, claims the work is non-essential and that, by failing to stop during the lockdown, it is putting the lives of workers and their families at risk.
It says that health workers remain without personal protective equipment (PPE) and that money used for construction projects should be channelled to pay for medical supplies instead.
The protesters said they were respecting social distancing guidelines by wearing gloves and masks and claimed the actions were part of their state-sanctioned daily exercise.
"Our nurses and doctors are without PPE, yet these workers can continue because the government deems them key workers," said one, in a video posted online. "Our real key essential workers are without PPE because of projects like this."
Demonstrators wore gloves and face masks and remained 2 metres apart throughout the protests.
Banners reading "NHS not HS2" intend to draw attention to the disparity of funding between new government projects and the "chronic underfunding" of the NHS, HS2 Rebellion said.
The UK government has expanded the criteria for who qualifies for a free test for coronavirus to all essential workers and their families in England – up to 10 million people. The list of essential workers is the same as the one used to allow the children of key workers to carry on going to school during the lockdown:
Health and social careFrontline health and social care staff such as doctors, nurses, midwives, paramedics, as well as support and specialist staff in the health and social care sector. In addition it includes those working in supply chains including producers and distributors of medicines and personal protective equipment.
Education and childcareNursery, teaching staff and social workers.
Key public servicesThose required to run the justice system, religious staff, as well as those responsible for managing the deceased, and journalists providing public service broadcasting.
Local and national governmentAdministrative occupations essential to the effective delivery of the Covid-19 response or delivering essential public services.
Food and other necessary goodsThose involved in the production, processing, distribution, sale and delivery of food.
Public safety and national securityPolice, support staff, Ministry of Defence civilian staff and armed forces personnel, fire and rescue staff, and those responsible for border security, prisons and probation.
TransportThose who will keep air, water, road and rail passenger and freight transport modes operating.
Utilities, communication and financial servicesStaff required to keep oil, gas, electricity, water and sewerage operations running. Staff in the civil nuclear, chemical and telecommunications sectors. Those in postal services and those working to provide essential financial services.
Some protesters scaled a tree using climbing equipment in front of the main building at Euston station in central London and displayed similar banners.
A spokesman for the Metropolitan police said officers were called at approximately 7am on Monday following reports of a protest, alongside members of the British Transport Police.
Officers engaged with the group who had gathered but no arrests were made, the Met said.
HS2 Rebellionsaid it had blockaded more than 20 other sites from London to Crackley Woods in Warwickshire.
Protests have also been staged in the Colne Valley, where an HS2 compound has been blocked since 3 March by demonstrators asserting squatters' rights at its entrance.
A statement said the group "wish to emphasise the public resistance to HS2's destruction of our ancient woodland and wildlife habitats, and HS2's failure to stop construction works at multiple sites breaching HSE Covid guidelines and exposing their workers, protesters, families and communities to unnecessary risk during a national health crisis".