Coronavirus 3 May: at a glance
A summary of the biggest developments in the global coronavirus outbreak
Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
The number of people who have died after testing positive for Covid-19 has reached 244,320, according to Johns Hopkins University. A total of 3,452,285 infections have been recorded globally.
French feminist advocacy groups have reported an increase in sexual assault and harassment incidents in daylight, as aggressors know their victims are unlikely to be able to summon help. French prosecutors recorded two rapes in public spaces within a 24-hour period, in a district north of Paris.
Singapore has confirmed 657 new coronavirus cases, the vast majority of them foreign workers living in dormitories, taking the city-state's total to 18,205. Cramped living conditions for migrant workers are are thought to be contributing to the country's high number of cases.
The Pope has called for any successful Covid-19 vaccine to be shared worldwide. He said international scientific cooperation would be important in discovering a vaccine, stressing that it is "important to unite scientific capabilities, in a transparent and impartial way".
The Cabinet Office minister Michael Gove gave the UK government's daily briefing and announced that the country's death toll had reach 28,446, an increase of 315. He also announced that the number of tests carried out in the previous 24 hours was less than 80,000 despite a target of 100,000 a day.
A coalition of artists, celebrities, scientists and intellectuals has warned that Brazil's indigenous peoples are at grave risk of a Covid-19 "genocide". Madonna, Oprah Winfrey, Brad Pitt, David Hockney and Paul McCartney are among those who have signed an open letter to the country's president, Jair Bolsonaro.
Vietnam has confirmed its first coronavirus case in nine days, bringing its total to 271. The country's lockdown was eased in late April and it is yet to record a Covid-19 death.
Footballers in Serie A, Italy's top division, will be allowed to resume individual training sessions from Monday. It is the latest step in a series of cautious moves towards restarting top-level sport across Europe, which has also seen players in England and Germany permitted different degrees of training ground work.
One-third of 500 random coronavirus tests in Afghanistan's capital, Kabul, have come back positive. It has raised fears that one of the world's most fragile states may be harbouring widespread undetected infections.