Man and his daughter die of Covid-19 within days of each other
MP David Davis pays tribute to former police officer and Red Cross director David Whincup
A woman has had to bury her daughter and husband within days of each other after both died from coronavirus.
Tributes were paid to former police officer and Red Cross director David Whincup, 79, and his daughter Joanne Rennison, 52, who both passed away after contracting the disease.
MP David Davis described Whincup, from Cottingham in east Yorkshire, as an "utterly decent man". "David was the kindest, most thoughtful and utterly decent man I have ever had the privilege to meet. He had a fantastic commitment to selfless public service. We shall all miss him greatly," he added.
Whincup, who lived with his wife, Margaret, their daughter Joanne and granddaughter Alice, said his greatest achievement was his family. He worked as a director for the Red Cross and prior to that he was a Humberside police officer for more than 30 years.
His charity work raised thousands of pounds for causes in Hull and East Yorkshire and he supported many other charities as a founder member of Haltemprice Lions club in 1973, serving as president four times and as secretary.
Rennison also became a Red Cross fundraising manager. Diagnosed with multiple sclerosis when she was 30, her family said the MS Society was always a focus in her fundraising efforts.
Tributes have also been paid to 25-year-old Nasro Ade – a "beautiful spirit". Her devastated family told how they had to say their final goodbyes on a video call as she lay in a hospital bed.
Ade, originally from Somalia, had kidney failure and died within 11 days of being diagnosed with the virus at St George's hospital in Tooting, south London, last month.
Her sister Fartuun Ade, 23, said the family were unable to visit her before she passed away, and had to say their goodbyes via FaceTime.
"It's been so difficult for family not to be with her and tell her how much we love her. It's been so hard to take in. But all this love we have been receiving from people all around the world, who were touched by Nasro's story. It has brought comfort to our family," said Fartuun.
She added: "There's probably thousands of millions of families around the world experiencing the same thing. I pray for everyone, for their health, for their life. Nasro was a blessing to us and to so many she touched."
For one family there was relief after a 16-year-old girl managed to recover from the disease – waking from a coma on her birthday.
Marisa Bappoo spent 21 days in Southampton children's hospital's intensive care unit, much of the time on a ventilator, when she woke to find nurses had put up birthday banners, cards and pictures of her family.
She said: "Mum and dad say the nurses were always holding my hand and stroking my head. They gave me massages and plaited my hair. I came round still attached to the ventilator.
"I was frightened, but one of the nurses was there holding my hand to reassure me. I was amazed when I saw the happy birthday banner. Later they gave me loads of presents as if I was their daughter. It's something I will never forget."
Bappoo is among just a small number of children to have fallen seriously ill with the virus. Her father, Roshan, 48, a graphic designer from Basingstoke, said: "We'd all been suffering from the virus and were recovering, but Marisa didn't.
"She became very poorly. It was shocking to see her struggling to breathe. They were going to start to bring her round when she woke up by herself on her 16th birthday. We were elated. It was the best birthday present."
Emelita Hurboda was named as the latest healthcare worker to die from the virus. The 62-year-old nurse and mother of three originally from the Philippines, who worked in Nottingham, was described as a "strong woman with a kind heart".
Her daughter Michelle said: "Our mum is a dedicated nurse who spent her life caring for others. The doctors and nurses have given us the opportunity to see her one last time and say our goodbyes. We stayed by her side until she passed away."
Emotional tributes were also paid to nurse Philomena Cherian, 62, who worked at John Radcliffe hospital in Oxford. Originally from India, she was remembered as an "incredibly caring friend and colleague". A fundraising page described Cherian as "a great human being, caring mother and wife who lived her whole life supporting them."
Her friend Jayakrishnan Nair wrote: "For her nursing was not just a profession but it was her passion."
Other victims included healthcare support worker Afua Fofie and Gill Oakes, a senior nurse at Bolton hospice.
Piggott, head of capital estates at Birmingham women's and children's NHS foundation trust, was remembered as "an all-round great guy". His wife, Julie, said: "Mark was a great family man, a loving husband and fantastic dad to our sons Daniel and Alex. We're devastated to have to say goodbye to him."