Misallocated NHS resources fuelled spread of virus in care homes, say bosses
Senior figures fear that inadequate support and equipment caused sector to plunge into crisis
A failure to provide care homes with enough NHS expertise and hospital equipment has exacerbated the growing coronavirus crisis among their residents, senior care figures have warned.
Thousands of deaths within homes have come alongside spare intensive care capacity in hospitals, raising concerns in the social care sector that resources have been misallocated. It has also prompted scepticism within the sector over claims from Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, that the threat to care homes had been "flagged" since the start of the pandemic.
Care home owners are now warning that the sector is still some way off a peak in cases, unlike the country as a whole. Official data next week is expected to show well over 5,000 care home deaths in total. However, unions are also warning that money has been stripped out of the care home sector for years in profits, leaving it underfunded and ill-prepared.
Senior figures are now calling for more spare NHS equipment to be deployed to care homes where possible. "We needed the capacity in the NHS, but we also needed the NHS to reach into care homes. We needed homes to be able to do things like ventilator care," said Martin Green, chief executive of Care England.
"There are these new Nightingale hospitals and that's fine, but one of the things I would have expected them to do was to say, 'the NHS is going to have a really big role in supporting homes. We will have to put ventilators into care homes. In effect, we will have to turn some beds in care homes into mobile ICUs for the duration of the pandemic'.
"The secretary of state said care homes had been a top priority since the start of the pandemic, all I can say to him is, it didn't feel like it."
Vic Rayner, executive director of the National Care Forum, said there should have been more medical expertise available to homes earlier on in the pandemic. "It would have helped to learn about the trajectory and early signs," she said. "There is evidence that the virus manifests in a different way in older people, such as drops in oxygen levels, so having the right equipment in homes to monitor those things and having access to the right medical expertise, either on a call or getting someone to come out to help, would probably have been enormously helpful. It would absolutely still be helpful now.
"Health and care is supposed to be an integrated partnership, and this has not felt that way. Let's make sure, whatever has happened, that we've learned and move on at pace. The depressing thing is that it doesn't feel like we've managed to get the right support at scale."
Pavan Dhaliwal, from one of the biggest care providers, MHA, said regular mass-testing must now be the aim. "Staff members with symptoms are not coming to work, so any new outbreaks must be coming from staff who are asymptomatic," she said. "Not to test them is absurd. We also need to be given saliva tests for residents with dementia. Administering swab tests for people living with the condition is not easy. There must be a different way."
Meanwhile, unions have raised concerns about the way that money has been squeezed out of the social care system by corporate owners, leaving it ill-equipped for the pandemic. "Care shouldn't be about profit, but that's sadly the model that's developed in the UK," said Unison assistant general secretary Christina McAnea.
"Often financed by shadowy private equity or inscrutable hedge funds, care home companies have precariously high levels of debt. Too often, millions that should be spent on care are being squirrelled away into offshore tax havens.
"When the pandemic passes, this must all change. We have to ditch the idea that care can be run for profit, fund the sector properly and give its dedicated staff a long overdue and handsome pay rise."
A report last year by the Centre for Health and the Public Interest suggested that as much as £1.5bn a year was "leaking" from the care sector in the form of rent, profit, directors' fees and debt repayments, rather than being spent on the care of residents.
Green defended the industry against accusations of profiteering last week, saying that corporate providers had spent huge amounts on personal protective equipment. "These businesses have been putting money in. It's very easy to make a swipe at investors, but there has been no government investment in new services for the last 30 years in the social care sector."
Robert Ford, 80, Plymouth
My wife's been in a home since August and I'm so worried. I've been desperately trying to get her home, she cries on the phone now I can't see her every other day, begging me to get her out. If she gets coronavirus, I'll never see her again. We just want to be together at home so we can have some happiness again and have these few years left we have together.
My wife, who's 87, was diagnosed with Alzheimer's in 2016. She has a very short-term memory and is quite OCD, but we could manage. She has a temper and kicked off with carers coming to the home before, but she has mellowed now and I've got neighbours and people who said they could help.
This situation is dragging us both down. I have no one to talk to but these four walls and a little dog. The care staff at the home are wonderful, but we need each other. If one of us gets it, we'll die together.
Katie Foxcroft, 19, care home worker, Burnley
I've been working at a private, family-run care home in Accrington for about a year and a half now. I do evening shifts and go to college in the day to study for my health and social work degree.
It's really upsetting for the residents right now. They can't see their families and a lot of them don't understand why. You just have to do your best to calm them down and look after them.
I was really worried at the beginning of the outbreak, but the public have been donating PPE to us so we have that covered. Luckily we haven't had any cases of coronavirus, but we're vigilant. It's a hard job. I do love it, but I'm paid just under £7 an hour and it feels that we carers are so unappreciated by the government. I don't feel valued, no.
We see what others don't – we are there for your mum, grandma or relative when they need us the most. We lift their spirits, we bath them, help them with supper and bed and check in on them or give them space when they need it.
Anonymous, care home owner
I own and run a dementia care home with 20 residential beds in the south of England. After seeing what happened elsewhere, we went into early lockdown at the end of February, more than three weeks before the government instructed us to do so. We kept two beds free to facilitate full quarantine if needed and decided not to admit additional residents unless it was 100% safe. I also sourced PPE independently. Government support in terms of PPE has been woefully inadequate: we have been provided with 300 masks, but we are getting through 50 a day, and we're directed to suppliers without stock.
We have, thus far, remained free of coronavirus, thanks to the diligence of my brilliant team, and the fact that we have made the difficult decision to stop all visitors. We care for residents as if they were in our own family home. We have worked really hard to keep residents engaged and happy with all sorts of social interaction, including virtual group activities with their families, bingo, singing and quizzes. I've also started a blog and share photos with families every few days.
Regular testing for all my staff – we don't use agency workers – and residents is key to ensure we don't have any asymptomatic cases. However, we haven't yet been able to access any testing, despite statements from government that they are available for all key workers.