IVF clinics set to reopen across UK
Clinics will be required to show they can provide safe treatment during coronavirus pandemic
IVF clinics are set to reopen in May, after the fertility regulator said it was lifting its suspension of all fertility services due to the coronavirus outbreak.
The move will come as welcome news to people who were forced to put their IVF treatment on hold during the crisis.
Clinics across the UK can apply to reopen from 11 May, the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) has confirmed, if they ensure the safety and protection of staff and patients.
Both private and NHS clinics will be required to show they are able to provide safe treatment during the outbreak before they are given the green light to restart.
Physical distancing must be observed in waiting rooms, telephone appointments should be used when suitable and personal protective equipment used when necessary.
The health secretary, Matt Hancock, said: "Now that we are past the peak, I am delighted to announce the restoration of fertility services.
"People who are relying on fertility treatment have been worried during these unprecedented times not knowing when they could continue their journey to start a family.
"We wanted to open these clinics as soon as it was safe to do so, and our strict guidelines will ensure staff and patients remain safe as we continue to tackle this virus."
HFEA, which regulates Britain's fertility industry, ordered both NHS and private clinics to suspend treatment for those undergoing IVF from 15 April. Prior to this, all new IVF treatment was banned.
The news caused heartache for many women desperately trying to conceive, with many fearing they could miss their chance by the time the restrictions were lifted.
Data from the HFEA showed that more than 54,000 patients underwent 75,000 fertility treatments in 2017, resulting in 20,500 births.
Sally Cheshire, the HFEA chair, said: "Our priority throughout the pandemic has been to consider how treatment could resume quickly and safely for as many patients as possible and our clear plan sets out how clinics can treat and care for patients safely during the continuing Covid-19 pandemic.
"I know that the closure of clinics has been extremely distressing for patients and this will be good news for those wanting to resume treatment and have the opportunity to try for their much longed for family."