Demand for coronavirus tests raises concerns over HIV and malaria
Some firms shifting production away from malaria, HIV and TB, which kill millions
If you would like to share your stories about testing you can get in touch by filling in the form \nbelow. Only the Guardian can see your \ncontributions and one of our journalists may contact you to discuss \nfurther.
Some firms shifting production away from malaria, HIV and TB, which kill millions
Governments were caught out when Covid-19 hit, having overlooked the need to be able to test for new diseases because they were focused on drugs and vaccines for those they already knew about.
Now there are fears that the rush to supply wealthier countries pressing for more tests may destabilise the fight against HIV, malaria and tuberculosis, illnesses that kill millions, mostly in low- and middle-income countries.
"Some companies are planning to reduce or stop malaria, HIV and TB test production," said Dr Catharina Boehme, the chief executive of the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (Find) and an adviser to the World Health Organization. "They are shifting their production to Covid-19 tests."
Boehme said companies could get about 18 cents for a rapid malaria test and $10 for a Covid-19 test.
The Global Fund to fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria said it was concerned about "any action that might reduce the availability of tests or treatment for HIV, TB or malaria".
Its executive director, Peter Sands, said: "Given the risk that Covid-19 undermines our continued progress in the fight against existing epidemics, this is not the time to be to doing anything that weakens our ability to diagnose and treat those infected with HIV, TB and malaria in a timely and cost-effective way. Doing so would cost lives."
Diagnostics has been the poor relation to drugs and vaccines for years, as governments are now realising to their cost. The handful of countries that had specialised in diagnostics, including South Korea and Singapore, have had remarkable success in containing their epidemics. They were at a massive advantage.
"South Korea and Singapore both have a super strong diagnostics industry. Samsung, for example, has a diagnostics branch. A lot of the tech companies that we know more from mobile phones and so on have diagnostic branches," said Boehme. South Korea has factories that make tests for US and European companies.
In Singapore, Sars was a wake-up call. In the aftermath, the government recognised an opportunity and invested in the diagnostics industry. Diagnostics are much more complicated than drugs and vaccines. India, which mass-produces cheap generic drugs for the world, does not have big diagnostics production.
Germany, which has done more tests than any other country, got off to a flying start thanks to the virologist Christian Drosten, who produced the first test for Covid-19, backed by the WHO. In the UK, Public Health England took longer. Usually the Centers for Disease Control in the US is first off the blocks with new tests, but its did not work. It failed to pick up enough cases and also produced false positives.
Germany had a large and excellent laboratory network and the advantage of being decentralised, so it could respond to outbreaks with extensive testing done on on a regional and local basis.
By the time the UK decided to ramp up testing, it had similar problems as developing nations. There were stock-outs of testing kits and chemicals.
Smaller nations had less trouble obtaining what they needed. "The UK is one of the largest countries. If they hadn't ordered large enough amounts early enough, they would have lost out," said Boehme.
One of the handful of big companies with a US- and European-approved Covid-19 test is the BGI Group, a Chinese company that established testing in Wuhan at the start of the pandemic and then set up labs and testing in 11 other cities, which helped China get control of the outbreak. It was also involved in producing Ebola tests for Africa.
It supplies coronavirus tests to Sweden, and one of its companies, MGI, recently agreed to supply 2m tests to France. MGI has also offered to help the UK. "We want to help. Our manufacturing capacity now is 2m tests per day and we are ramping up to meet demand as we see it," said Perla El Hage, MGI's district sales manager for northern and western Europe.
Find is working with the WHO, Unicef, the World Food Programme and the Gates and Clinton foundations to obtain Covid-19 tests for low-income countries. It has a storage facility in Dubai. BGI is one of the companies that has helped, but the scale of need is a challenge.
"We need an estimated 1bn tests in the next 12 months for low- and middle-income countries," said Boehme. "Rapid diagnostic tests would be the ideal in terms of ease of use and price, but right now there is still a WHO recommendation against them because we lack evidence."
-testing
The diagnostic tests identify an antigen in the virus, rather than the antibodies that the immune system may produce to fight it off. Like the antibody tests, they can be handheld tests that do not need lab processing. "We need tests that are at least 90% sensitive. The ongoing evaluation studies will show where we are. The sooner we can get these tests out, the better," said Boehme.
Diagnostics are finally having their moment. On Monday there will be an international pledging conference for donor countries to promise funds for vaccines and work on epidemic preparedness. This time, it will include diagnostics. There is recognition of the crucial part they play in controlling a global pandemic, and acknowledgement that most countries have been very ill-prepared.