Global report: India sets new national daily case record
Parisian pedestrians must wear face coverings from Friday; Spain says school children over six must wear masks; China goes 12 days without local case
India has set a new national record of daily coronavirus infections, reporting more than 77,000 cases in 24 hours, just shy of the global one-day record tally held by America.
India's health ministry reported 77, 266 new cases on Friday, taking its total cases to 3.39 million, data from the federal health ministry showed. India also recorded more than 1,000 new deaths taking total fatalities, to 61,529, the fourth highest total in the world, behind the US, Brazil and Mexico.
The country has recorded the highest single-day caseload in the world every day since 7 August. The largest ever one day rise is 78,427, reported by the US on 25 July.
The worst affected part of India is the western state of Maharashtra, home to the country's financial centre, Mumbai. The state has recorded more than 23,000 deaths. The densely populated cities of Dehli and Chennai has also experienced large outbreaks.
The virus has now however spread into rural and isolated communities that have limited healthcare resources. The remote Andaman and Nicobar Islands, which have a population of 400,000, have reported a total of 2,944 coronavirus cases among its non-tribal population.
Many experts say that with India not testing enough people and many deaths not properly recorded, its death toll could be considerably higher than official data records. Several antibody tests have suggested a much wider-spread outbreak than .
Demand for personal protection equipment has soared in the country of 1.3 billion people, leading to a booming black market in used face masks and surgical gloves scavenged in some cases from hospitals. Police in the western city of Navi Mumbai on Friday said they seized from one gang 3.8 million pieces of refurbished single-use surgical gloves that were washed, dried and packed ready for sale.
Cases also rose in Indonesia, which reported its biggest rise in new cases for a second successive day on Friday. It passed the 3,000 mark in new daily cases for the first time and added 105 new deaths, as authorities in West Java tackled outbreaks in three factories that the provincial governor said could be due to workers not following health measures.
Among those was at a plant owned by Japanese automaker Suzuki, which cut operations by half after 71 employees tested positive for the coronavirus.
"When it turns out there are clusters, there was action that didn't really abide by the protocols, such as not wearing masks diligently, not keeping a safe distance, not washing hands, or there were asymptomatic people running around doing activities," said West Java's governor, Ridwan Kamil.
Friday's new cases nationwide brought the infections total to 165,887 and the death toll to 7,169. Indonesia's deaths are the most in Southeast Asia and its infections are the second highest after the Philippines.
China, where the virus was first identified, meanwhile reported nine new Covid-19 cases, all imported. It marked the twelfth consecutive day of no local transmissions, according to the National Health Commission.
Global infections from Covid-19 now stand at 24.3m, with deaths totalling more than 830,000.
In the US – the worst hit country – Donald Trump wrapped up the Republican convention in the US suggesting a vaccine could be available before the end of the year "or maybe even sooner", but Washington University warned 317,000 Americans could die from the virus by 1 December.
Trump lauded his administration's handling of the virus at the Republican convention's final night in front a large crowd who sat close together, mostly without face masks. Trump said to "save as many lives as possible, we are focusing on the science, the facts and the data".
There was no mention of the US's 180,000 death toll, or the 5.8m infections, as Trump recounted what he saw as the US's successes on fighting the virus, including the familiar refrain of stopping flights form China and Europe months ago.
He suggested a vaccine may be available in 2020 and criticised his presidential opponent:"Joe Biden's plan is not a solution to the virus, but rather a surrender," Trump said.
On Thursday, the University of Washington expanded its forecast on US virus fatalities, projecting more than 317,000 deaths in the United States by 1 December.
The new forecast, by the university's Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation reflected an increase of about 8,000 deaths from its previous forecast. However, the report also suggests that if 95% of Americans wore a mask, the death toll could be reduced by about 67,000 lives.
The IHME's projections have been cited in the past by the White House and are watched closely by public health officials.
Europe meanwhile, faced rising infections and from Friday morning, all Parisians pedestrians had to wear face coverings. Cyclists and those using other open-air transport were included in the new directive, but not people in cars.
The new restriction followed the government's announcement that 21 of 101 French administrative regions, or departments, were now in the red zone where the virus was actively circulating, and where local authorities could impose stricter rules on gatherings and movements.
The Tour de France was reported to be in doubt after the race's starting region, the Alpes-Maritimes, was included in the red alert.
On Thursday France reported its second-highest level of cases ever and a new post-lockdown high, with 6,111 cases. The highest daily total of 7,578 was set on 30 March.
Meanwhile, Spain announced schoolchildren aged six and over must wear masks to class, just days before the start of the new academic year.
Asked whether concerned parents would have the right to keep their children at home, education minister Isabel Celaa said schools were safer than other places.
"It is mandatory to go to class. For anyone who is afraid, I must say that we have been working since day one for a safe environment," she said, acknowledging there was no place with "zero risk."