Kristin Urquiza, whose father died from Covid, condemns Trump in DNC speech
Urquiza said her father, Mark Anthony Urquiza, voted for Trump and listened to his efforts to downplay virus
Kristin Urquiza, whose father died in Arizona in June after a weeks-long battle against the coronavirus, has blamed Donald Trump and failures in leadership for his death in a powerful address to the virtual Democratic 2020 convention.
Urquiza said her father, Mark Anthony Urquiza, voted for Trump in 2016. She said he listened to the president's efforts to downplay the threat of the pandemic, which has killed more than 170,000 people and infected more than 5.4m people – far more than any other country in the world.
"My dad was a healthy 65-year-old," Urquiza said. "His only pre-existing condition was trusting Donald Trump, and for that, he paid with his life."
Urquiza said she would cast her vote for Joe Biden in November to honor her father. "One of the last things that my father said to me was that he felt betrayed by the likes of Donald Trump," Urquiza said. "And so, when I cast my vote for Joe Biden, I will do it for my dad."
Urquiza's speech marked one of the standout moments of the night, in which high-profile speakers such as former first lady Michelle Obama, the Vermont senator Bernie Sanders and Democratic and Republican politicians delivered addresses on the same program as American voters.
Amid the appeals to unity, were searing reminders of the lives touched – and lost – by the parallel crises of a global pandemic, its economic fallout and racial injustice.
From a nurse in Texas worried about "the kiddos" going back to school in a pandemic to a Pennsylvania farmer fearful that he might be the last generation to till a field if the economy does not improve and a repentant Trump supporter, all urged the nation to choose new leadership.
Urquiza came to national prominence earlier this year after writing a blistering obituary for her father in which she offered a scathing condemnation of Arizona's Republican governor, Doug Ducey.
She blamed her dad's death on the "carelessness of the politicians who continue to jeopardize the health of brown bodies through a clear lack of leadership, refusal to acknowledge the severity of this crisis, and inability and unwillingness to give clear and decisive direction on how to minimize risk".
Weeks later, Biden sent her a letter, which she shared with the Arizona Republic.
"The family bonds that Mark spent his life strengthening are meant for times like these," Biden wrote. "They're meant for you to lean on to share some of those burdens that are terribly difficult to bear alone. And they're meant to continue to grow in your love and care for one another, no matter the adversity."
Monday evening marked the opening night of the Democratic national convention, where Biden will formally accept the Democratic presidential nomination later this week. Tens of thousands of people gathered in-person at the 2016 convention, but this year's events are being held almost entirely virtually for the first time, due to safety concerns around the pandemic.