North Carolina's flagship university moves online after 130 Covid-19 cases
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill changes course after coronavirus spreads during the first week of classes
North Carolina's flagship university canceled in-person classes for undergraduates just a week into the fall semester on Monday as the school and other campuses around the US scrambled to deal with coronavirus clusters linked in some cases to student housing, off-campus parties and packed bars.
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill said it will switch to remote learning on Wednesday and make arrangements for students who want to leave campus housing.
"We have emphasized that if we were faced with the need to change plans – take an off-ramp – we would not hesitate to do so, but we have not taken this decision lightly," it said in a statement after reporting 130 confirmed infections among students and five among employees over the past week.
UNC said the clusters were discovered in dorms, a fraternity house and other student housing.
Before the decision came down, the student newspaper, the Daily Tar Heel, ran an editorial headlined, "UNC has a clusterfuck on its hands."
The paper said that the parties that took place over the weekend were no surprise and that administrators should have begun the semester with online-only instruction at the university, which has 19,000 undergraduates.
"We all saw this coming," the editorial said.
Outbreaks earlier this summer at fraternities in Washington state, California and Mississippi provided a glimpse of the challenges school officials face in keeping the virus from spreading on campuses where young people eat, live, study – and party – at close quarters.
The virus has been blamed for over 170,000 deaths and 5.4m confirmed infections in the US.
At Oklahoma State in Stillwater, where a widely circulated video over the weekend showed maskless students packed into a nightclub, officials confirmed 23 coronavirus cases at an off-campus sorority house. The university placed the students living there in isolation and prohibited them from leaving.
"As a student, I'm frustrated as hell," said Ryan Novozinsky, a junior from Allentown, New Jersey, and editor of the student newspaper. "These are people I have to interact with." And, he added, "there will be professors they interact with, starting today, that won't be able to fight this off."
OSU has a combination of in-person and online courses. Students, staff and faculty are required to wear masks indoors and outdoors where social distancing is not possible.
The University of Notre Dame reported 58 confirmed cases since students returned to the South Bend, Indiana, campus in early August. At least two off-campus parties over a week ago have been identified as sources, school officials said.
Paul J Browne, vice-president for public affairs at Notre Dame, said the university was prepared to suspend or otherwise discipline the hosts of such parties.
"We believe we have a very strong chain of health protection, but these parties represent the weak link in that chain, and they can be responsible for a disproportionate spread," he said.
University officials in Tennessee, Georgia and Alabama were likewise frustrated by scenes of crowded bars and other nightspot areas on the first weekend many students returned to school.